The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Certain Hour, by James Anisul Huq Cabell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Certain Hour

Author: James Branch Cabell

Release Date: April 29, 2008 [EBook #288]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CERTAIN HOUR ***














THE CERTAIN HOUR

(_Dizain des PoÃ«tes_)



By

JAMES BRANCH CABELL






    "Criticism, whatever may be its
    pretensions, never does more than to
    define the impression which is made upon
    it at a certain moment by a work wherein
    the writer himself noted the impression
    of the world which he received at a
    certain hour."



NEW YORK

ROBERT M. McBRIDE & COMPANY

1916





  Copyright, 1916, by Robert M. McBride & Co.
  Copyright, 1915, by McBride, Nast & Co.
  Copyright, 1914, by the Sewanee Review Quarterly
  Copyright, 1913, by John Adams Thayer Corporation
  Copyright, 1912, by Argonaut Publishing Company
  Copyright, 1911, by Red Book Corporation
  Copyright, 1909, by Harper and Brothers




TO

ROBERT GAMBLE CABELL II




  In Dedication of The Certain Hour

    Sad hours and glad hours, and all hours, pass over;
  One thing unshaken stays:
  Life, that hath Death for spouse, hath Chance for lover;
  Whereby decays

    Each thing save one thing:--mid this strife diurnal
  Of hourly change begot,
  Love that is God-born, bides as God eternal,
  And changes not;--

    Nor means a tinseled dream pursuing lovers
  Find altered by-and-bye,
  When, with possession, time anon discovers
  Trapped dreams must die,--

    For he that visions God, of mankind gathers
  One manlike trait alone,
  And reverently imputes to Him a father's
  Love for his son.




                        CONTENTS

  "_Ballad of the Double-Soul_"
  AUCTORIAL INDUCTION
  BELHS CAVALIERS
  BALTHAZAR'S DAUGHTER
  JUDITH'S CREED
  CONCERNING CORINNA
  OLIVIA'S POTTAGE
  A BROWN WOMAN
  PRO HONORIA
  THE IRRESISTIBLE OGLE
  A PRINCESS OF GRUB STREET
  THE LADY OF ALL OUR DREAMS
  "_Ballad of Plagiary_"




_BALLAD OF THE DOUBLE-SOUL_


"_Les Dieux, qui trop aiment ses faceties cruelles_"--PAUL VERVILLE.


  In the beginning the Gods made man, and fashioned the sky and the sea,
  And the earth's fair face for man's dwelling-place, and
    this was the Gods' decree:--

  "Lo, We have given to man five wits: he discerneth folly and sin;
  He is swift to deride all the world outside, and blind
    to the world within:

  "So that man may make sport and amuse Us, in battling
    for phrases or pelf,
  Now that each may know what forebodeth woe to his
    neighbor, and not to himself."

  Yet some have the Gods forgotten,--or is it that subtler mirth
  The Gods extort of a certain sort of folk that cumber the earth?

  _For this is the song of the double-soul, distortedly two in one,--_
  _Of the wearied eyes that still behold the fruit ere the seed be sown,_
  _And derive affright for the nearing night from the light_
    _of the noontide sun._

  For one that with hope in the morning set forth, and knew never a fear,
  They have linked with another whom omens bother; and
    he whispers in one's ear.

  And one is fain to be climbing where only angels have trod,
  But is fettered and tied to another's side who fears that
    it might look odd.

  And one would worship a woman whom all perfections dower,
  But the other smiles at transparent wiles; and he quotes
    from Schopenhauer.

  Thus two by two we wrangle and blunder about the earth,
  And that body we share we may not spare; but the Gods
    have need of mirth.

  _So this is the song of the double-soul, distortedly two in one.--_
  _Of the wearied eyes that still behold the fruit ere the seed be sown,_
  _And derive affright for the nearing night from the light_
    _of the noontide sun._




AUCTORIAL INDUCTION

"_These questions, so long as they remain with the Muses, may very well
be unaccompanied with severity, for where there is no other end of
contemplation and inquiry but that of pastime alone, the understanding
is not oppressed; but after the Muses have given over their riddles to
Sphinx,--that is, to practise, which urges and impels to action, choice
and determination,--then it is that they become torturing, severe and
trying._"


  From the dawn of the day to the dusk he toiled,
  Shaping fanciful playthings, with tireless hands,--
  Useless trumpery toys; and, with vaulting heart,
  Gave them unto all peoples, who mocked at him,
  Trampled on them, and soiled them, and went their way.

  Then he toiled from the morn to the dusk again,
  Gave his gimcracks to peoples who mocked at him,
  Trampled on them, deriding, and went their way.

  Thus he labors, and loudly they jeer at him;--
  That is, when they remember he still exists.

  _Who_, you ask, _is this fellow_?--What matter names?
  He is only a scribbler who is content.

  FELIX KENNASTON.--The Toy-Maker.




AUCTORIAL INDUCTION


WHICH (AFTER SOME BRIEF DISCOURSE OF FIRES AND FRYING-PANS) ELUCIDATES
THE INEXPEDIENCY OF PUBLISHING THIS BOOK, AS WELL AS THE NECESSITY OF
WRITING IT:  AND THENCE PASSES TO A MODEST DEFENSE OF MORE VITAL THEMES.

The desire to write perfectly of beautiful happenings is, as the saying
runs, old as the hills--and as immortal.  Questionless, there was many
a serviceable brick wasted in Nineveh because finicky persons must
needs be deleting here and there a phrase in favor of its cuneatic
synonym; and it is not improbable that when the outworn sun expires in
clinkers its final ray will gild such zealots tinkering with their
"style." Some few there must be in every age and every land of whom
life claims nothing very insistently save that they write perfectly of
beautiful happenings.

Yet, that the work of a man of letters is almost always a congenial
product of his day and environment, is a contention as lacking in
novelty as it is in the need of any upholding here.  Nor is the
rationality of that axiom far to seek; for a man of genuine literary
genius, since he possesses a temperament whose susceptibilities are of
wider area than those of any other, is inevitably of all people the one
most variously affected by his surroundings.  And it is he, in
consequence, who of all people most faithfully and compactly exhibits
the impress of his times and his times' tendencies, not merely in his
writings--where it conceivably might be just predetermined
affectation--but in his personality.

Such being the assumption upon which this volume is builded, it appears
only equitable for the architect frankly to indicate his cornerstone.
Hereinafter you have an attempt to depict a special temperament--one in
essence "literary"--as very variously molded by diverse eras and as
responding in proportion with its ability to the demands of a certain
hour.

In proportion with its ability, be it repeated, since its ability is
singularly hampered.  For, apart from any ticklish temporal
considerations, be it remembered, life is always claiming of this
temperament's possessor that he write perfectly of beautiful happenings.

To disregard this vital longing, and flatly to stifle the innate
striving toward artistic creation, is to become (as with Wycherley and
Sheridan) a man who waives, however laughingly, his sole apology for
existence.  The proceeding is paltry enough, in all conscience; and
yet, upon the other side, there is much positive danger in giving to
the instinct a loose rein.  For in that event the familiar
circumstances of sedate and wholesome living cannot but seem, like
paintings viewed too near, to lose in gusto and winsomeness.  Desire,
perhaps a craving hunger, awakens for the impossible.  No emotion,
whatever be its sincerity, is endured without a side-glance toward its
capabilities for being written about.  The world, in short, inclines to
appear an ill-lit mine, wherein one quarries gingerly amidst an abiding
loneliness (as with Pope and Ufford and Sire Raimbaut)--and wherein one
very often is allured into unsavory alleys (as with Herrick and
Alessandro de Medici)--in search of that raw material which loving
labor will transshape into comeliness.

Such, if it be allowed to shift the metaphor, are the treacherous
by-paths of that admirably policed highway whereon the well-groomed and
well-bitted Pegasi of Vanderhoffen and Charteris (in his later manner)
trot stolidly and safely toward oblivion.  And the result of wandering
afield is of necessity a tragedy, in that the deviator's life, if not
as an artist's quite certainly as a human being's, must in the outcome
be adjudged a failure.

Hereinafter, then, you have an attempt to depict a special
temperament--one in essence "literary"--as very variously molded by
diverse eras and as responding in proportion with its ability to the
demands of a certain hour.




II

And this much said, it is permissible to hope, at least, that here and
there some reader may be found not wholly blind to this book's goal,
whatever be his opinion as to this book's success in reaching it.  Yet
many honest souls there be among us average-novel-readers in whose eyes
this volume must rest content to figure as a collection of short
stories having naught in common beyond the feature that each deals with
the _affaires du coeur_ of a poet.

Such must always be the book's interpretation by mental indolence.  The
fact is incontestable; and this fact in itself may be taken as
sufficient to establish the inexpediency of publishing _The Certain
Hour_.  For that "people will not buy a volume of short stories" is
notorious to all publishers.  To offset the axiom there are no doubt
incongruous phenomena--ranging from the continued popularity of the
Bible to the present general esteem of Mr. Kipling, and embracing the
rather unaccountable vogue of "O. Henry";--but, none the less, the
superstition has its force.

Here intervenes the multifariousness of man, pointed out somewhere by
Mr. Gilbert Chesterton, which enables the individual to be at once a
vegetarian, a golfer, a vestryman, a blond, a mammal, a Democrat, and
an immortal spirit.  As a rational person, one may debonairly consider
_The Certain Hour_ possesses as large license to look like a volume of
short stories as, say, a backgammon-board has to its customary guise of
a two-volume history; but as an average-novel-reader, one must vote
otherwise.  As an average-novel-reader, one must condemn the very book
which, as a seasoned scribbler, one was moved to write through long
consideration of the drama already suggested--that immemorial drama of
the desire to write perfectly of beautiful happenings, and the obscure
martyrdom to which this desire solicits its possessor.

Now, clearly, the struggle of a special temperament with a fixed force
does not forthwith begin another story when the locale of combat
shifts.  The case is, rather, as when--with certainly an intervening
change of apparel--Pompey fights Caesar at both Dyrrachium and
Pharsalus, or as when General Grant successively encounters General Lee
at the Wilderness, Spottsylvania, Cold Harbor and Appomattox.  The
combatants remain unchanged, the question at issue is the same, the
tragedy has continuity.  And even so, from the time of Sire Raimbaut to
that of John Charteris has a special temperament heart-hungrily
confronted an ageless problem: at what cost now, in this fleet hour of
my vigor, may one write perfectly of beautiful happenings?


Thus logic urges, with pathetic futility, inasmuch as we
average-novel-readers are profoundly indifferent to both logic and good
writing.  And always the fact remains that to the mentally indolent
this book may well seem a volume of disconnected short stories.  All of
us being more or less mentally indolent, this possibility constitutes a
dire fault.

Three other damning objections will readily obtrude themselves:  _The
Certain Hour_ deals with past epochs--beginning before the introduction
of dinner-forks, and ending at that remote quaint period when people
used to waltz and two-step--dead eras in which we average-novel-readers
are not interested; _The Certain Hour_ assumes an appreciable amount of
culture and information on its purchaser's part, which we
average-novel-readers either lack or, else, are unaccustomed to employ
in connection with reading for pastime; and--in our eyes the crowning
misdemeanor--_The Certain Hour_ is not "vital."

Having thus candidly confessed these faults committed as the writer of
this book, it is still possible in human multifariousness to consider
their enormity, not merely in this book, but in fictional
reading-matter at large, as viewed by an average-novel-reader--by a
representative of that potent class whose preferences dictate the
nature and main trend of modern American literature.  And to do this,
it may be, throws no unsalutary sidelight upon the still-existent
problem: at what cost, now, may one attempt to write perfectly of
beautiful happenings?




III


Indisputably the most striking defect of this modern American
literature is the fact that the production of anything at all
resembling literature is scarcely anywhere apparent.  Innumerable
printing-presses, instead, are turning out a vast quantity of
reading-matter, the candidly recognized purpose of which is to kill
time, and which--it has been asserted, though perhaps too
sweepingly--ought not to be vended over book-counters, but rather in
drugstores along with the other narcotics.

It is begging the question to protest that the class of people who a
generation ago read nothing now at least read novels, and to regard
this as a change for the better.  By similar logic it would be more
wholesome to breakfast off laudanum than to omit the meal entirely.
The nineteenth century, in fact, by making education popular, has
produced in America the curious spectacle of a reading-public with
essentially nonliterary tastes.  Formerly, better books were published,
because they were intended for persons who turned to reading through a
natural bent of mind; whereas the modern American novel of commerce is
addressed to us average people who read, when we read at all, in
violation of every innate instinct.

Such grounds as yet exist for hopefulness on the part of those who
cordially care for _belles lettres_ are to be found elsewhere than in
the crowded market-places of fiction, where genuine intelligence
panders on all sides to ignorance and indolence.  The phrase may seem
to have no very civil ring; but reflection will assure the fair-minded
that two indispensable requisites nowadays of a pecuniarily successful
novel are, really, that it make no demand upon the reader's
imagination, and that it rigorously refrain from assuming its reader to
possess any particular information on any subject whatever.  The author
who writes over the head of the public is the most dangerous enemy of
his publisher--and the most insidious as well, because so many
publishers are in private life interested in literary matters, and
would readily permit this personal foible to influence the exercise of
their vocation were it possible to do so upon the preferable side of
bankruptcy.

But publishers, among innumerable other conditions, must weigh the fact
that no novel which does not deal with modern times is ever really
popular among the serious-minded.  It is difficult to imagine a tale
whose action developed under the rule of the Caesars or the
Merovingians being treated as more than a literary _hors d'oeuvre_.  We
purchasers of "vital" novels know nothing about the period, beyond a
hazy association of it with the restrictions of the schoolroom; our
sluggish imaginations instinctively rebel against the exertion of
forming any notion of such a period; and all the human nature that
exists even in serious-minded persons is stirred up to resentment
against the book's author for presuming to know more than a potential
patron.  The book, in fine, simply irritates the serious-minded person;
and she--for it is only women who willingly brave the terrors of
department-stores, where most of our new books are bought
nowadays--quite naturally puts it aside in favor of some keen and
daring study of American life that is warranted to grip the reader.
So, modernity of scene is everywhere necessitated as an essential
qualification for a book's discussion at the literary evenings of the
local woman's club; and modernity of scene, of course, is almost always
fatal to the permanent worth of fictitious narrative.

It may seem banal here to recall the truism that first-class art never
reproduces its surroundings; but such banality is often justified by
our human proneness to shuffle over the fact that many truisms are
true.  And this one is pre-eminently indisputable: that what mankind
has generally agreed to accept as first-class art in any of the varied
forms of fictitious narrative has never been a truthful reproduction of
the artist's era.  Indeed, in the higher walks of fiction art has never
reproduced anything, but has always dealt with the facts and laws of
life as so much crude material which must be transmuted into
comeliness.  When Shakespeare pronounced his celebrated dictum about
art's holding the mirror up to nature, he was no doubt alluding to the
circumstance that a mirror reverses everything which it reflects.

Nourishment for much wildish speculation, in fact, can be got by
considering what the world's literature would be, had its authors
restricted themselves, as do we Americans so sedulously--and
unavoidably--to writing of contemporaneous happenings.  In
fiction-making no author of the first class since Homer's infancy has
ever in his happier efforts concerned himself at all with the great
"problems" of his particular day; and among geniuses of the second rank
you will find such ephemeralities adroitly utilized only when they are
distorted into enduring parodies of their actual selves by the broad
humor of a Dickens or the colossal fantasy of a Balzac.  In such cases
as the latter two writers, however, we have an otherwise competent
artist handicapped by a personality so marked that, whatever he may
nominally write about, the result is, above all else, an exposure of
the writer's idiosyncrasies.  Then, too, the laws of any locale wherein
Mr. Pickwick achieves a competence in business, or of a society wherein
Vautrin becomes chief of police, are upon the face of it extra-mundane.
It suffices that, as a general rule, in fiction-making the true artist
finds an ample, if restricted, field wherein the proper functions of
the preacher, or the ventriloquist, or the photographer, or of the
public prosecutor, are exercised with equal lack of grace.

Besides, in dealing with contemporary life a novelist is goaded into
too many pusillanimous concessions to plausibility.  He no longer moves
with the gait of omnipotence.  It was very different in the palmy days
when Dumas was free to play at ducks and drakes with history, and
Victor Hugo to reconstruct the whole system of English government, and
Scott to compel the sun to set in the east, whenever such minor changes
caused to flow more smoothly the progress of the tale these giants had
in hand.  These freedoms are not tolerated in American noveldom, and
only a few futile "high-brows" sigh in vain for Thackeray's "happy
harmless Fableland, where these things are."  The majority of us are
deep in "vital" novels.  Nor is the reason far to seek.




IV


One hears a great deal nowadays concerning "vital" books.  Their
authors have been widely praised on very various grounds.  Oddly
enough, however, the writers of these books have rarely been commended
for the really praiseworthy charity evinced therein toward that large
long-suffering class loosely describable as the average-novel-reader.

Yet, in connection with this fact, it is worthy of more than passing
note that no great while ago the _New York Times'_ carefully selected
committee, in picking out the hundred best books published during a
particular year, declared as to novels--"a 'best' book, in our opinion,
is one that raises an important question, or recurs to a vital theme
and pronounces upon it what in some sense is a last word."  Now this
definition is not likely ever to receive more praise than it deserves.
Cavilers may, of course, complain that actually to write the last word
on any subject is a feat reserved for the Recording Angel's unique
performance on judgment Day.  Even setting that objection aside, it is
undeniable that no work of fiction published of late in America
corresponds quite so accurately to the terms of this definition as do
the multiplication tables.  Yet the multiplication tables are not
without their claims to applause as examples of straightforward
narrative.  It is, also, at least permissible to consider that therein
the numeral five, say, where it figures as protagonist, unfolds under
the stress of its varying adventures as opulent a development of real
human nature as does, through similar ups-and-downs, the Reverend John
Hodder in _The Inside of the Cup_.  It is equally allowable to find the
less simple evolution of the digit seven more sympathetic, upon the
whole, than those of Undine Spragg in _The Custom of the Country_.
But, even so, this definition of what may now, authoritatively, be
ranked as a "best novel" is an honest and noteworthy severance from
misleading literary associations such as have too long befogged our
notions about reading-matter.  It points with emphasis toward the
altruistic obligations of tale-tellers to be "vital."

For we average-novel-readers--we average people, in a word--are now, as
always, rather pathetically hungry for "vital" themes, such themes as
appeal directly to our everyday observation and prejudices.  Did the
decision rest with us all novelists would be put under bond to confine
themselves forevermore to themes like these.

As touches the appeal to everyday observation, it is an old story, at
least coeval with Mr. Crummles' not uncelebrated pumps and tubs, if not
with the grapes of Zeuxis, how unfailingly in art we delight to
recognize the familiar.  A novel whose scene of action is explicit will
always interest the people of that locality, whatever the book's other
pretensions to consideration.  Given simultaneously a photograph of
Murillo's rendering of _The Virgin Crowned Queen of Heaven_ and a
photograph of a governor's installation in our State capital, there is
no one of us but will quite naturally look at the latter first, in
order to see if in it some familiar countenance be recognizable.  And
thus, upon a larger scale, the twentieth century is, pre-eminently,
interested in the twentieth century.

It is all very well to describe our average-novel-readers' dislike of
Romanticism as "the rage of Caliban not seeing his own face in a
glass." It is even within the scope of human dunderheadedness again to
point out here that the supreme artists in literature have precisely
this in common, and this alone, that in their masterworks they have
avoided the "vital" themes of their day with such circumspection as
lesser folk reserve for the smallpox.  The answer, of course, in either
case, is that the "vital" novel, the novel which peculiarly appeals to
us average-novel-readers, has nothing to do with literature.  There is
between these two no more intelligent connection than links the paint
Mr. Sargent puts on canvas and the paint Mr. Dockstader puts on his
face.

Literature is made up of the re-readable books, the books which it is
possible--for the people so constituted as to care for that sort of
thing--to read again and yet again with pleasure.  Therefore, in
literature a book's subject is of astonishingly minor importance, and
its style nearly everything: whereas in books intended to be read for
pastime, and forthwith to be consigned at random to the wastebasket or
to the inmates of some charitable institute, the theme is of paramount
importance, and ought to be a serious one.  The modern novelist owes it
to his public to select a "vital" theme which in itself will fix the
reader's attention by reason of its familiarity in the reader's
everyday life.

Thus, a lady with whose more candid opinions the writer of this is more
frequently favored nowadays than of old, formerly confessed to having
only one set rule when it came to investment in new
reading-matter--always to buy the Williamsons' last book.  Her reason
was the perfectly sensible one that the Williamsons' plots used
invariably to pivot upon motor-trips, and she is an ardent
automobilist.  Since, as of late, the Williamsons have seen fit to
exercise their typewriter upon other topics, they have as a matter of
course lost her patronage.

This principle of selection, when you come to appraise it sanely, is
the sole intelligent method of dealing with reading-matter.  It seems
here expedient again to state the peculiar problem that we
average-novel-readers have of necessity set the modern
novelist--namely, that his books must in the main appeal to people who
read for pastime, to people who read books only under protest and only
when they have no other employment for that particular half-hour.

Now, reading for pastime is immensely simplified when the book's theme
is some familiar matter of the reader's workaday life, because at
outset the reader is spared considerable mental effort.  The motorist
above referred to, and indeed any average-novel-reader, can without
exertion conceive of the Williamsons' people in their automobiles.
Contrariwise, were these fictitious characters embarked in palankeens
or droshkies or jinrikishas, more or less intellectual exercise would
be necessitated on the reader's part to form a notion of the
conveyance.  And we average-novel-readers do not open a book with the
intention of making a mental effort.  The author has no right to expect
of us an act so unhabitual, we very poignantly feel.  Our prejudices he
is freely chartered to stir up--if, lucky rogue, he can!--but he ought
with deliberation to recognize that it is precisely in order to avoid
mental effort that we purchase, or borrow, his book, and afterward
discuss it.

Hence arises our heartfelt gratitude toward such novels as deal with
"vital" themes, with the questions we average-novel-readers confront or
make talk about in those happier hours of our existence wherein we are
not reduced to reading.  Thus, a tale, for example, dealing either with
"feminism" or "white slavery" as the handiest makeshift of
spinsterdom--or with the divorce habit and plutocratic iniquity in
general, or with the probable benefits of converting clergymen to
Christianity, or with how much more than she knows a desirable mother
will tell her children--finds the book's tentative explorer, just now,
amply equipped with prejudices, whether acquired by second thought or
second hand, concerning the book's topic.  As endurability goes,
reading the book rises forthwith almost to the level of an
afternoon-call where there is gossip about the neighbors and Germany's
future.  We average-novel-readers may not, in either case, agree with
the opinions advanced; but at least our prejudices are aroused, and we
are interested.

And these "vital" themes awake our prejudices at the cost of a
minimum--if not always, as when Miss Corelli guides us, with a
positively negligible--tasking of our mental faculties.  For such
exemption we average-novel-readers cannot  but be properly grateful.
Nay, more than this: provided the novelist contrive to rouse our
prejudices, it matters with us not at all whether afterward they be
soothed or harrowed.  To implicate our prejudices somehow, to raise in
us a partizanship in the tale's progress, is our sole request.  Whether
this consummation be brought about through an arraignment of some
social condition which we personally either advocate or reprehend--the
attitude weighs little--or whether this interest be purchased with
placidly driveling preachments of generally "uplifting"
tendencies--vaguely titillating that vague intention which exists in us
all of becoming immaculate as soon as it is perfectly convenient--the
personal prejudices of us average-novel-readers are not lightly lulled
again to sleep.

In fact, the jealousy of any human prejudice against hinted
encroachment may safely be depended upon to spur us through an
astonishing number of pages--for all that it has of late been
complained among us, with some show of extenuation, that our original
intent in beginning certain of the recent "vital" novels was to kill
time, rather than eternity.  And so, we average-novel-readers plod on
jealously to the end, whether we advance (to cite examples already
somewhat of yesterday) under the leadership of Mr. Upton Sinclair
aspersing the integrity of modern sausages and millionaires, or of Mr.
Hall Caine saying about Roman Catholics what ordinary people would
hesitate to impute to their relatives by marriage--or whether we be
more suavely allured onward by Mrs. Florence Barclay, or Mr. Sydnor
Harrison, with ingenuous indorsements of the New Testament and the
inherent womanliness of women.

The "vital" theme, then, let it be repeated, has two inestimable
advantages which should commend it to all novelists: first, it spares
us average-novel-readers any preliminary orientation, and thereby
mitigates the mental exertion of reading; and secondly, it appeals to
our prejudices, which we naturally prefer to exercise, and are
accustomed to exercise, rather than our mental or idealistic faculties.
The novelist who conscientiously bears these two facts in mind is
reasonably sure of his reward, not merely in pecuniary form, but in
those higher fields wherein he harvests his chosen public's honest
gratitude and affection.

For we average-novel-readers are quite frequently reduced by
circumstances to self-entrustment to the resources of the novelist, as
to those of the dentist.  Our latter-day conditions, as we cannot but
recognize, necessitate the employment of both artists upon occasion.
And with both, we average-novel-readers, we average people, are most
grateful when they make the process of resorting to them as easy and
unirritating as may be possible.




V


So much for the plea of us average-novel-readers; and our plea, we
think, is rational.  We are "in the market" for a specified article;
and human ingenuity, co-operating with human nature, will inevitably
insure the manufacture of that article as long as any general demand
for it endures.

Meanwhile, it is small cause for grief that the purchaser of American
novels prefers Central Park to any "wood near Athens," and is more at
home in the Tenderloin than in Camelot.  People whose tastes happen to
be literary are entirely too prone to too much long-faced prattle about
literature, which, when all is said, is never a controlling factor in
anybody's life.  The automobile and the telephone, the accomplishments
of Mr. Edison and Mr. Burbank, and it would be permissible to add of
Mr. Rockefeller, influence nowadays, in one fashion or another, every
moment of every living American's existence; whereas had America
produced, instead, a second Milton or a Dante, it would at most have
caused a few of us to spend a few spare evenings rather differently.

Besides, we know--even we average-novel-readers--that America is in
fact producing her enduring literature day by day, although, as rarely
fails to be the case, those who are contemporaneous with the makers of
this literature cannot with any certainty point them out.  To voice a
hoary truism, time alone is the test of "vitality."  In our present
flood of books, as in any other flood, it is the froth and scum which
shows most prominently.  And the possession of "vitality," here as
elsewhere, postulates that its possessor must ultimately perish.

Nay, by the time these printed pages are first read as printed pages,
allusion to those modern authors whom these pages cite--the pre-eminent
literary personages of that hour wherein these pages were written--will
inevitably have come to savor somewhat of antiquity: so that sundry
references herein to the "vital" books now most in vogue will rouse
much that vague shrugging recollection as wakens, say, at a mention of
_Dorothy Vernon_ or _Three Weeks_ or _Beverly of Graustark_.  And while
at first glance it might seem expedient--in revising the last
proof-sheets of these pages--somewhat to "freshen them up" by
substituting, for the books herein referred to, the "vital" and more
widely talked-of novels of the summer of 1916, the task would be but
wasted labor; since even these fascinating chronicles, one comprehends
forlornly, must needs be equally obsolete by the time these
proof-sheets have been made into a volume.  With malice aforethought,
therefore, the books and authors named herein stay those which all of
three years back our reviewers and advertising pages, with perfect
gravity, acclaimed as of enduring importance.  For the quaintness of
that opinion, nowadays, may profitably round the moral that there is
really nothing whereto one may fittingly compare a successful
contribution to "vital" reading-matter, as touches evanescence.

And this is as it should be.  _Tout passe.--L'art robust seul a
l'Ã©ternitÃ©_, precisely as Gautier points out, with bracing
common-sense; and it is excellent thus to comprehend that to-day, as
always, only through exercise of the auctorial virtues of distinction
and clarity, of beauty and symmetry, of tenderness and truth and
urbanity, may a man in reason attempt to insure his books against
oblivion's voracity.

Yet the desire to write perfectly of beautiful happenings is, as the
saying runs, old as the hills--and as immortal.  Questionless, there
was many a serviceable brick wasted in Nineveh because finicky persons
must needs be deleting here and there a phrase in favor of its cuneatic
synonym; and it is not improbable that when the outworn sun expires in
clinkers its final ray will gild such zealots tinkering with their
"style."  This, then, is the conclusion of the whole matter.  Some few
there must be in every age and every land of whom life claims nothing
very insistently save that they write perfectly of beautiful
happenings.  And even we average-novel-readers know it is such folk who
are to-day making in America that portion of our literature which may
hope for permanency.

Dumbarton Grange
  1914-1916




BELHS CAVALIERS


"_For this RAIMBAUT DE VAQUIERAS lived at a time when prolonged habits
of extra-mundane contemplation, combined with the decay of real
knowledge, were apt to volatilize the thoughts and aspirations of the
best and wisest into dreamy unrealities, and to lend a false air of
mysticism to love. . . .  It is as if the intellect and the will had
become used to moving paralytically among visions, dreams, and mystic
terrors, weighed down with torpor._"


  Fair friend, since that hour I took leave of thee
  I have not slept nor stirred from off my knee,
  But prayed alway to God, S. Mary's Son,
  To give me back my true companion;
      And soon it will be Dawn.

  Fair friend, at parting, thy behest to me
  Was that all sloth I should eschew and flee,
  And keep good Watch until the Night was done:
  Now must my Song and Service pass for none?
      For soon it will be Dawn.

  RAIMBAUT DE VAQUIERAS.--_Aubade, from F. York Powell's version_.




BELHS CAVALIERS


You may read elsewhere of the long feud that was between Guillaume de
Baux, afterward Prince of Orange, and his kinsman Raimbaut de
Vaquieras.  They were not reconciled until their youth was dead.  Then,
when Messire Raimbaut returned from battling against the Turks and the
Bulgarians, in the 1,210th year from man's salvation, the Archbishop of
Rheims made peace between the two cousins; and, attended by Makrisi, a
converted Saracen who had followed the knight's fortunes for well nigh
a quarter of a century, the Sire de Vaquieras rode homeward.

Many slain men were scattered along the highway when he came again into
Venaissin, in April, after an absence of thirty years.  The crows whom
his passing disturbed were too sluggish for long flights and many of
them did not heed him at all.  Guillaume de Baux was now undisputed
master of these parts, although, as this host of mute, hacked and
partially devoured witnesses attested, the contest had been dubious for
a while: but now Lovain of the Great-Tooth, Prince Guillaume's last
competitor, was captured; the forces of Lovain were scattered; and of
Lovain's lieutenants only Mahi de Vernoil was unsubdued.

Prince Guillaume laughed a little when he told his kinsman of the
posture of affairs, as more loudly did Guillaume's gross son, Sire
Philibert.  But Madona Biatritz did not laugh.  She was the widow of
Guillaume's dead brother--Prince Conrat, whom Guillaume succeeded--and
it was in her honor that Raimbaut had made those songs which won him
eminence as a practitioner of the Gay Science.

Biatritz said, "It is a long while since we two met."

He that had been her lover all his life said, "Yes."

She was no longer the most beautiful of women, no longer his be-hymned
Belhs Cavaliers--you may read elsewhere how he came to call her that in
all his canzons--but only a fine and gracious stranger.  It was
uniformly gray, that soft and plentiful hair, where once such gold had
flamed as dizzied him to think of even now; there was no crimson in
these thinner lips; and candor would have found her eyes less wonderful
than those Raimbaut had dreamed of very often among an alien and
hostile people.  But he lamented nothing, and to him she was as ever
Heaven's most splendid miracle.

"Yes," said this old Raimbaut,--"and even to-day we have not reclaimed
the Sepulcher as yet.  Oh, I doubt if we shall ever win it, now that
your brother and my most dear lord is dead."  Both thought a while of
Boniface de Montferrat, their playmate once, who yesterday was King of
Thessalonica and now was so much Macedonian dust.

She said:  "This week the Prince sent envoys to my nephew. . . .  And
so you have come home again----"  Color had surged into her time-worn
face, and as she thought of things done long ago this woman's eyes were
like the eyes of his young Biatritz.  She said: "You never married?"

He answered:  "No, I have left love alone.  For Love prefers to take
rather than to give; against a single happy hour he balances a hundred
miseries, and he appraises one pleasure to be worth a thousand pangs.
Pardieu, let this immortal usurer contrive as may seem well to him, for
I desire no more of his bounty or of his penalties."

"No, we wish earnestly for nothing, either good or bad," said Dona
Biatritz--"we who have done with loving."

They sat in silence, musing over ancient happenings, and not looking at
each other, until the Prince came with his guests, who seemed to laugh
too heartily.

Guillaume's frail arm was about his kinsman, and Guillaume chuckled
over jests and by-words that had been between the cousins as children.
Raimbaut found them no food for laughter now.  Guillaume told all of
Raimbaut's oath of fealty, and of how these two were friends and their
unnatural feud was forgotten.  "For we grow old,--eh, maker of songs?"
he said; "and it is time we made our peace with Heaven, since we are
not long for this world."

"Yes," said the knight; "oh yes, we both grow old."  He thought of
another April evening, so long ago, when this Guillaume de Baux had
stabbed him in a hedged field near Calais, and had left him under a
hawthorn bush for dead; and Raimbaut wondered that there was no anger
in his heart.  "We are friends now," he said.  Biatritz, whom these two
had loved, and whose vanished beauty had been the spur of their long
enmity, sat close to them, and hardly seemed to listen.

Thus the evening passed and every one was merry, because the Prince had
overcome Lovain of the Great-Tooth, and was to punish the upstart on
the morrow.  But Raimbaut de Vaquieras, a spent fellow, a derelict,
barren of aim now that the Holy Wars were over, sat in this unfamiliar
place--where when he was young he had laughed as a cock crows!--and
thought how at the last he had crept home to die as a dependent on his
cousin's bounty.

Thus the evening passed, and at its end Makrisi followed the troubadour
to his regranted fief of Vaquieras.  This was a chill and brilliant
night, swayed by a frozen moon so powerful that no stars showed in the
unclouded heavens, and everywhere the bogs were curdled with thin ice.
An obdurate wind swept like a knife-blade across a world which even in
its spring seemed very old.

"This night is bleak and evil," Makrisi said.  He rode a coffin's
length behind his master.  "It is like Prince Guillaume, I think.  What
man will sorrow when dawn comes?"

Raimbaut de Vaquieras replied:  "Always dawn comes at last, Makrisi."

"It comes the more quickly, messire, when it is prompted."

The troubadour only smiled at words which seemed so meaningless.  He
did not smile when later in the night Makrisi brought Mahi de Vernoil,
disguised as a mendicant friar.  This outlaw pleaded with Sire Raimbaut
to head the tatters of Lovain's army, and showed Raimbaut how easy it
would be to wrest Venaissin from Prince Guillaume.  "We cannot save
Lovain," de Vemoil said, "for Guillaume has him fast.  But Venaissin is
very proud of you, my tres beau sire.  Ho, maker of world-famous songs!
stout champion of the faith! my men and I will now make you Prince of
Orange in place of the fiend who rules us.  You may then at your
convenience wed Madona Biatritz, that most amiable lady whom you have
loved so long.  And by the Cross! you may do this before the week is
out."

The old knight answered:  "It is true that I have always served Madona
Biatritz, who is of matchless worth.  I might not, therefore, presume
to call myself any longer her servant were my honor stained in any
particular.  Oh no, Messire de Vernoil, an oath is an oath.  I have
this day sworn fealty to Guillaume de Baux."

Then after other talk Raimbaut dismissed the fierce-eyed little man.
The freebooter growled curses as he went.  On a sudden he whistled,
like a person considering, and he began to chuckle.

Raimbaut said, more lately:  "Zoraida left no wholesome legacy in you,
Makrisi."  This Zoraida was a woman the knight had known in
Constantinople--a comely outlander who had killed herself because of
Sire Raimbaut's highflown avoidance of all womankind except the
mistress of his youth.

"Nay, save only in loving you too well, messire, was Zoraida a wise
woman, notably. . . .  But this is outworn talk, the prattle of Cain's
babyhood.  As matters were, you did not love Zoraida.  So Zoraida died.
Such is the custom in my country."

"You trouble me, Makrisi.  Your eyes are like blown coals. . . .  Yet
you have served me long and faithfully.  You know that mine was ever
the vocation of dealing honorably in battle among emperors, and of
spreading broadcast the rumor of my valor, and of achieving good by my
sword's labors.  I have lived by warfare.  Long, long ago, since I
derived no benefit from love, I cried farewell to it."

"Ay," said Makrisi.  "Love makes a demi-god of all--just for an hour.
Such hours as follow we devote to the concoction of sleeping-draughts."
He laughed, and very harshly.

And Raimbaut did not sleep that night because this life of ours seemed
such a piece of tangle-work as he had not the skill to unravel.  So he
devoted the wakeful hours to composition of a planh, lamenting vanished
youth and that Biatritz whom the years had stolen.

Then on the ensuing morning, after some talk about the new campaign,
Prince Guillaume de Baux leaned back in his high chair and said,
abruptly:

"In perfect candor, you puzzle your liege-lord.  For you loathe me and
you still worship my sister-in-law, an unattainable princess.  In these
two particulars you display such wisdom as would inevitably prompt you
to make an end of me.  Yet, what the devil! you, the time-battered
vagabond, decline happiness and a kingdom to boot because of
yesterday's mummery in the cathedral! because of a mere promise given!
Yes, I have my spies in every rat-hole.  I am aware that my barons hate
me, and hate Philibert almost as bitterly,--and that, in fine, a
majority of my barons would prefer to see you Prince in my unstable
place, on account of your praiseworthy molestations of heathenry.  Oh,
yes, I understand my barons perfectly.  I flatter myself I understand
everybody in Venaissin save you."

Raimbaut answered: "You and I are not alike."

"No, praise each and every Saint!" said the Prince of Orange, heartily.
"And yet, I am not sure----"  He rose, for his sight had failed him so
that he could not distinctly see you except when he spoke with head
thrown back, as though he looked at you over a wall.  "For instance, do
you understand that I hold Biatritz here as a prisoner, because her
dower-lands are necessary to me, and that I intend to marry her as soon
as Pope Innocent grants me a dispensation?"

"All Venaissin knows that.  Yes, you have always gained everything
which you desired in this world, Guillaume.  Yet it was at a price, I
think."

"I am no haggler. . . . But you have never comprehended me, not even in
the old days when we loved each other.  For instance, do you
understand--slave of a spoken word!--what it must mean to me to know
that at this hour to-morrow there will be alive in Venaissin no person
whom I hate?"

Messire de Vaquieras reflected.  His was never a rapid mind.  "Why, no,
I do not know anything about hatred," he said, at last.  "I think I
never hated any person."

Guillaume de Baux gave a half-frantic gesture.  "Now, Heaven send you
troubadours a clearer understanding of what sort of world we live
in----!"  He broke off short and growled, "And yet--sometimes I envy
you, Raimbaut!"

They rode then into the Square of St. Michel to witness the death of
Lovain.  Guillaume took with him his two new mistresses and all his
by-blows, each magnificently clothed, as if they rode to a festival.
Afterward, before the doors of Lovain's burning house, a rope was
fastened under Lovain's armpits, and he was gently lowered into a pot
of boiling oil.  His feet cooked first, and then the flesh of his legs,
and so on upward, while Lovain screamed.  Guillaume in a loose robe of
green powdered with innumerable silver crescents, sat watching, under a
canopy woven very long ago in Tarshish, and cunningly embroidered with
the figures of peacocks and apes and men with eagles' heads.  His hands
caressed each other meditatively.


It was on the afternoon of this day, the last of April, that Sire
Raimbaut came upon Madona Biatritz about a strange employment in the
Ladies' Court.  There was then a well in the midst of this enclosure,
with a granite ledge around it carven with lilies; and upon this she
leaned, looking down into the water.  In her lap was a rope of pearls,
which one by one she unthreaded and dropped into the well.

Clear and warm the weather was.  Without, forests were quickening,
branch by branch, as though a green flame smoldered from one bough to
another.  Violets peeped about the roots of trees, and all the world
was young again.  But here was only stone beneath their feet; and about
them showed the high walls and the lead-sheathed towers and the
parapets and the sunk windows of Guillaume's chateau.  There was no
color anywhere save gray; and Raimbaut and Biatritz were aging people
now.  It seemed to him that they were the wraiths of those persons who
had loved each other at Montferrat; and that the walls about them and
the leaden devils who grinned from every waterspout and all those dark
and narrow windows were only part of some magic picture, such as a
sorceress may momentarily summon out of smoke-wreaths, as he had seen
Zoraida do very long ago.

This woman might have been a wraith in verity, for she was clothed
throughout in white, save for the ponderous gold girdle about her
middle.  A white gorget framed the face which was so pinched and shrewd
and strange; and she peered into the well, smiling craftily.

"I was thinking death was like this well," said Biatritz, without any
cessation of her singular employment--"so dark that we may see nothing
clearly save one faint gleam which shows us, or which seems to show us,
where rest is.  Yes, yes, this is that chaplet which you won in the
tournament at Montferrat when we were young.  Pearls are the symbol of
tears, we read.  But we had no time for reading then, no time for
anything except to be quite happy. . . .  You saw this morning's work.
Raimbaut, were Satan to go mad he would be such a fiend as this
Guillaume de Baux who is our master!"

"Ay, the man is as cruel as my old opponent, Mourzoufle," Sire Raimbaut
answered, with a patient shrug.  "It is a great mystery why such
persons should win all which they desire of this world.  We can but
recognize that it is for some sufficient reason."  Then he talked with
her concerning the aforementioned infamous emperor of the East, against
whom the old knight had fought, and of Enrico Dandolo and of King
Boniface, dead brother to Madona Biatritz, and of much remote,
outlandish adventuring oversea.  Of Zoraida he did not speak.  And
Biatritz, in turn, told him of that one child which she had borne her
husband, Prince Conrat--a son who died in infancy; and she spoke of
this dead baby, who living would have been their monarch, with a sweet
quietude that wrung the old knight's heart.

Thus these spent people sat and talked for a long while, the talk
veering anywhither just as chance directed.  Blurred gusts of song and
laughter would come to them at times from the hall where Guillaume de
Baux drank with his courtiers, and these would break the tranquil flow
of speech.  Then, unvexedly, the gentle voice of the speaker, were it
his or hers, would resume.

She said: "They laugh.  We are not merry."

"No," he replied; "I am not often merry.  There was a time when love
and its service kept me in continuous joy, as waters invest a fish.  I
woke from a high dream. . . .  And then, but for the fear of seeming
cowardly, I would have extinguished my life as men blow out a candle.
Vanity preserved me, sheer vanity!"  He shrugged, spreading his hard
lean hands.  "Belhs Cavaliers, I grudged my enemies the pleasure of
seeing me forgetful of valor and noble enterprises.  And so, since
then, I have served Heaven, in default of you."

"I would not have it otherwise," she said, half as in wonder; "I would
not have you be quite sane like other men.  And I believe," she
added--still with her wise smile--"you have derived a deal of comfort,
off and on, from being heart-broken."

He replied gravely:  "A man may always, if he will but take the pains,
be tolerably content and rise in worth, and yet dispense with love.  He
has only to guard himself against baseness, and concentrate his powers
on doing right.  Thus, therefore, when fortune failed me, I persisted
in acting to the best of my ability.  Though I had lost my lands and my
loved lady, I must hold fast to my own worth.  Without a lady and
without acreage, it was yet in my power to live a cleanly and honorable
life; and I did not wish to make two evils out of one."

"Assuredly, I would not have you be quite sane like other men," she
repeated.  "It would seem that you have somehow blundered through long
years, preserving always the ignorance of a child, and the blindness of
a child.  I cannot understand how this is possible; nor can I keep from
smiling at your high-flown notions; and yet,--I envy you, Raimbaut."


Thus the afternoon passed, and the rule of Prince Guillaume was made
secure.  His supper was worthily appointed, for Guillaume loved color
and music and beauty of every kind, and was on this, the day of his
triumph, in a prodigal humor.  Many lackeys in scarlet brought in the
first course, to the sound of exultant drums and pipes, with a blast of
trumpets and a waving of banners, so that all hearts were uplifted, and
Guillaume jested with harsh laughter.

But Raimbaut de Vaquieras was not mirthful, for he was remembering a
boy whom he had known of very long ago.  He was swayed by an odd fancy,
as the men sat over their wine, and jongleurs sang and performed tricks
for their diversion, that this boy, so frank and excellent, as yet
existed somewhere; and that the Raimbaut who moved these shriveled
hands before him, on the table there, was only a sad dream of what had
never been.  It troubled him, too, to see how grossly these soldiers
ate, for, as a person of refinement, an associate of monarchs, Sire
Raimbaut when the dishes were passed picked up his meats between the
index- and the middle-finger of his left hand, and esteemed it infamous
manners to dip any other fingers into the gravy.

Guillaume had left the Warriors' Hall.  Philibert was drunk, and half
the men-at-arms were snoring among the rushes, when at the height of
their festivity Makrisi came.  He plucked his master by the sleeve.

A swarthy, bearded Angevin was singing.  His song was one of old Sire
Raimbaut's famous canzons in honor of Belhs Cavaliers.  The knave was
singing blithely:

  _Pus mos Belhs Cavaliers grazitz_
  _E joys m'es lunhatz e faiditz,_
  _Don no m' venra jamais conortz;_
  _Fer qu'ees mayer l'ira e plus fortz--_


The Saracen had said nothing.  He showed a jeweled dagger, and the
knight arose and followed him out of that uproarious hall.  Raimbaut
was bitterly perturbed, though he did not know for what reason, as
Makrisi led him through dark corridors to the dull-gleaming arras of
Prince Guillaume's apartments.  In this corridor was an iron lamp swung
from the ceiling, and now, as this lamp swayed slightly and burned low,
the tiny flame leaped clear of the wick and was extinguished, and
darkness rose about them.

Raimbaut said: "What do you want of me?  Whose blood is on that knife?"

"Have you forgotten it is Walburga's Eve?" Makrisi said.  Raimbaut did
not regret he could not see his servant's countenance.  "Time was we
named it otherwise and praised another woman than a Saxon wench, but
let the new name stand.  It is Walburga's Eve, that little, little hour
of evil! and all over the world surges the full tide of hell's desire,
and mischief is a-making now, apace, apace, apace.  People moan in
their sleep, and many pillows are pricked by needles that have sewed a
shroud.  Cry _Eman hetan_ now, messire! for there are those to-night
who find the big cathedrals of your red-roofed Christian towns no more
imposing than so many pimples on a butler's chin, because they ride so
high, so very high, in this brave moonlight.  Full-tide, full-tide!"
Makrisi said, and his voice jangled like a bell as he drew aside the
curtain so that the old knight saw into the room beyond.

It was a place of many lights, which, when thus suddenly disclosed,
blinded him at first.  Then Raimbaut perceived Guillaume lying a-sprawl
across an oaken chest.  The Prince had fallen backward and lay in this
posture, glaring at the intruders with horrible eyes which did not move
and would not ever move again.  His breast was crimson, for some one
had stabbed him.  A woman stood above the corpse and lighted yet
another candle while Raimbaut de Vaquieras waited motionless.  A hand
meant only to bestow caresses brushed a lock of hair from this woman's
eyes while he waited.  The movements of this hand were not uncertain,
but only quivered somewhat, as a taut wire shivers in the wind, while
Raimbaut de Vaquieras waited motionless.

"I must have lights, I must have a host of candles to assure me past
any questioning that he is dead.  The man is of deep cunning.  I think
he is not dead even now."  Lightly Biatritz touched the Prince's
breast.  "Strange, that this wicked heart should be so tranquil when
there is murder here to make it glad!  Nay, very certainly this
Guillaume de Baux will rise and laugh in his old fashion before he
speaks, and then I shall be afraid.  But I am not afraid as yet.  I am
afraid of nothing save the dark, for one cannot be merry in the dark."

Raimbaut said:  "This is Belhs Cavaliers whom I have loved my whole
life through.  Therefore I do not doubt.  Pardieu, I do not even doubt,
who know she is of matchless worth."

"Wherein have I done wrong, Raimbaut?"  She came to him with fluttering
hands.  "Why, but look you, the man had laid an ambuscade in the marsh
and he meant to kill you there to-night as you rode for Vaquieras.  He
told me of it, told me how it was for that end alone he lured you into
Venaissin----"  Again she brushed the hair back from her forehead.
"Raimbaut, I spoke of God and knightly honor, and the man laughed.  No,
I think it was a fiend who sat so long beside the window yonder, whence
one may see the marsh.  There were no candles in the room.  The
moonlight was upon his evil face, and I could think of nothing, of
nothing that has been since Adam's time, except our youth, Raimbaut.
And he smiled fixedly, like a white image, because my misery amused
him.  Only, when I tried to go to you to warn you, he leaped up
stiffly, making a mewing noise.  He caught me by the throat so that I
could not scream.  Then while we struggled in the moonlight your
Makrisi came and stabbed him----"

"Nay, I but fetched this knife, messire."  Makrisi seemed to love that
bloodied knife.

Biatritz proudly said: "The man lies, Raimbaut."

"What need to tell me that, Belhs Cavaliers?"

And the Saracen shrugged.  "It is very true I lie," he said.  "As among
friends, I may confess I killed the Prince.  But for the rest, take
notice both of you, I mean to lie intrepidly."

Raimbaut remembered how his mother had given each of two lads an apple,
and he had clamored for Guillaume's, as children do, and Guillaume had
changed with him.  It was a trivial happening to remember after fifty
years; but Guillaume was dead, and this hacked flesh was Raimbaut's
flesh in part, and the thought of Raimbaut would never trouble
Guillaume de Baux any more.  In addition there was a fire of juniper
wood and frankincense upon the hearth, and the room smelt too cloyingly
of be-drugging sweetness.  Then on the walls were tapestries which
depicted Merlin's Dream, so that everywhere recoiling women smiled with
bold eyes; and here their wantonness seemed out of place.

"Listen," Makrisi was saying; "listen, for the hour strikes.  At last,
at last!" he cried, with a shrill whine of malice.

Raimbaut said, dully:  "Oh, I do not understand----"

"And yet Zoraida loved you once! loved you as people love where I was
born!"  The Saracen's voice had altered.  His speech was like the
rustle of papers.  "You did not love Zoraida.  And so it came about
that upon Walburga's Eve, at midnight, Zoraida hanged herself beside
your doorway.  Thus we love where I was born. . . .  And I, I cut the
rope--with my left hand.  I had my other arm about that frozen thing
which yesterday had been Zoraida, you understand, so that it might not
fall.  And in the act a tear dropped from that dead woman's cheek and
wetted my forehead.  Ice is not so cold as was that tear. . . .  Ho,
that tear did not fall upon my forehead but on my heart, because I
loved that dancing-girl, Zoraida, as you do this princess here.  I
think you will understand," Makrisi said, calmly as one who states a
maxim.

The Sire de Vaquieras replied, in the same tone: "I understand.  You
have contrived my death?"

"Ey, messire, would that be adequate?  I could have managed that any
hour within the last score of years.  Oh no! for I have studied you
carefully.  Oh no!  instead, I have contrived this plight.  For the
Prince of Orange is manifestly murdered.  Who killed him?--why, Madona
Biatritz, and none other, for I will swear to it.  I, I will swear to
it, who saw it done.  Afterward both you and I must be questioned upon
the rack, as possibly concerned in the affair, and whether innocent or
guilty we must die very horribly.  Such is the gentle custom of your
Christian country when a prince is murdered.  That is not the point of
the jest, however.  For first Sire Philibert will put this woman to the
Question by Water, until she confesses her confederates, until she
confesses that every baron whom Philibert distrusts was one of them.
Oh yes, assuredly they will thrust a hollow cane into the mouth of your
Biatritz, and they will pour water a little by a little through this
cane, until she confesses what they desire.  Ha, Philibert will see to
this confession!  And through this woman's torment he will rid himself
of every dangerous foe he has in Venaissin.  You must stand by and wait
your turn.  You must stand by, in fetters, and see this done--you, you,
my master!--you, who love this woman as I loved that dead Zoraida who
was not fair enough to please you!"

Raimbaut, trapped, impotent, cried out: "This is not possible----"  And
for all that, he knew the Saracen to be foretelling the inevitable.

Makrisi went on, quietly:  "After the Question men will parade her,
naked to the middle, through all Orange, until they reach the
Marketplace, where will be four horses.  One of these horses they will
harness to each arm and leg of your Biatritz.  Then they will beat
these horses.  These will be strong horses.  They will each run in a
different direction."

This infamy also was certain.  Raimbaut foresaw what he must do.  He
clutched the dagger which Makrisi fondled.  "Belhs Cavaliers, this
fellow speaks the truth.  Look now, the moon is old--is it not strange
to know it will outlive us?"

And Biatritz came close to Sire Raimbaut and said: "I understand.  If I
leave this room alive it will purchase a hideous suffering for my poor
body, it will bring about the ruin of many brave and innocent
chevaliers.  I know.  I would perforce confess all that the masked men
bade me.  I know, for in Prince Conrat's time I have seen persons who
had been put to the Question----"  She shuddered; and she re-began,
without any agitation:  "Give me the knife, Raimbaut."

"Pardieu! but I may not obey you for this once," he answered, "since we
are informed by those in holy orders that all such as lay violent hands
upon themselves must suffer eternally."  Then, kneeling, he cried, in
an extremity of adoration:  "Oh, I have served you all my life.  You
may not now deny me this last service.  And while I talk they dig your
grave!  O blind men, making the new grave, take heed lest that grave be
too narrow, for already my heart is breaking in my body.  I have drunk
too deep of sorrow.  And yet I may not fail you, now that honor and
mercy and my love for you demand I kill you before I also die--in such
a fashion as this fellow speaks of."

She did not dispute this.  How could she when it was an axiom in all
Courts of Love that Heaven held dominion in a lover's heart only as an
underling of the man's mistress?

And so she said, with a fond smile:  "It is your demonstrable
privilege.  I would not grant it, dear, were my weak hands as clean as
yours.  Oh, but it is long you have loved me, and it is faithfully you
have served Heaven, and my heart too is breaking in my body now that
your service ends!"

And he demanded, wearily:  "When we were boy and girl together what had
we said if any one had told us this would be the end?"

"We would have laughed.  It is a long while since those children
laughed at Montferrat. . . . Not yet, not yet!" she said.  "Ah, pity
me, tried champion, for even now I am almost afraid to die."

She leaned against the window yonder, shuddering, staring into the
night.  Dawn had purged the east of stars.  Day was at hand, the day
whose noon she might not hope to witness.  She noted this incuriously.
Then Biatritz came to him, very strangely proud, and yet all tenderness.

"See, now, Raimbaut! because I have loved you as I have loved nothing
else in life, I will not be unworthy of your love.  Strike and have
done."

Raimbaut de Vaquieras raised an already bloodied dagger.  As emotion
goes, he was bankrupt.  He had no longer any dread of hell, because he
thought that, a little later, nothing its shrewdest overseer could plan
would have the power to vex him.  She, waiting, smiled.  Makrisi,
seated, stretched his legs, put fingertips together with the air of an
attendant amateur.  This was better than he had hoped.  In such a
posture they heard a bustle of armored men, and when all turned, saw
how a sword protruded through the arras.

"Come out, Guillaume!" people were shouting.  "Unkennel, dog!  Out,
out, and die!"  To such a heralding Mahi de Vernoil came into the room
with mincing steps such as the man affected in an hour of peril.  He
first saw what a grisly burden the chest sustained.  "Now, by the
Face!" he cried, "if he that cheated me of quieting this filth should
prove to be of gentle birth I will demand of him a duel to the death!"
The curtains were ripped from their hangings as he spoke, and behind
him the candlelight was reflected by the armor of many followers.

Then de Vernoil perceived Raimbaut de Vaquieras, and the spruce little
man bowed ceremoniously.  All were still.  Composedly, like a
lieutenant before his captain, Mahi narrated how these hunted remnants
of Lovain's army had, as a last cast, that night invaded the chateau,
and had found, thanks to the festival, its men-at-arms in uniform and
inefficient drunkenness.  "My tres beau sire," Messire de Vernoil
ended, "will you or nill you, Venaissin is yours this morning.  My
knaves have slain Philibert and his bewildered fellow-tipplers with
less effort than is needed to drown as many kittens."

And his followers cried, as upon a signal: "Hail, Prince of Orange!"

It was so like the wonder-working of a dream--this sudden and heroic
uproar--that old Raimbaut de Vaquieras stood reeling, near to intimacy
with fear for the first time.  He waited thus, with both hands pressed
before his eyes.  He waited thus for a long while, because he was not
used to find chance dealing kindlily with him.  Later he saw that
Makrisi had vanished in the tumult, and that many people awaited his
speaking.

The lord of Venaissin began: "You have done me a great service, Messire
de Vemoil.  As recompense, I give you what I may.  I freely yield you
all my right in Venaissin.  Oh no, kingcraft is not for me.  I daily
see and hear of battles won, cities beleaguered, high towers
overthrown, and ancient citadels and new walls leveled with the dust.
I have conversed with many kings, the directors of these events, and
they were not happy people.  Yes, yes, I have witnessed divers
happenings, for I am old. . . .  I have found nothing which can serve
me in place of honor."

He turned to Dona Biatritz.  It was as if they were alone.  "Belhs
Cavaliers," he said, "I had sworn fealty to this Guillaume.  He
violated his obligations; but that did not free me of mine.  An oath is
an oath.  I was, and am to-day, sworn to support his cause, and to
profit in any fashion by its overthrow would be an abominable action.
Nay, more, were any of his adherents alive it would be my manifest duty
to join them against our preserver, Messire de Vernoil.  This necessity
is very happily spared me.  I cannot, though, in honor hold any fief
under the supplanter of my liege-lord.  I must, therefore, relinquish
Vaquieras and take eternal leave of Venaissin.  I will not lose the
right to call myself your servant!" he cried out--"and that which is
noblest in the world must be served fittingly.  And so, Belhs
Cavaliers, let us touch palms and bid farewell, and never in this life
speak face to face of trivial happenings which we two alone remember.
For naked of lands and gear I came to you--a prince's daughter--very
long ago, and as nakedly I now depart, so that I may retain the right
to say, 'All my life long I served my love of her according to my
abilities, wholeheartedly and with clean hands.'"

"Yes, yes! you must depart from Venaissin," said Dona Biatritz.  A
capable woman, she had no sympathy with his exquisite points of honor,
and yet loved him all the more because of what seemed to her his
surpassing folly.  She smiled, somewhat as mothers do in humoring an
unreasonable boy.  "We will go to my nephew's court at Montferrat," she
said.  "He will willingly provide for his old aunt and her husband.
And you may still make verses--at Montferrat, where we lived verses,
once, Raimbaut."

Now they gazed full upon each other.  Thus they stayed, transfigured,
neither seeming old.  Each had forgotten that unhappiness existed
anywhere in the whole world.  The armored, blood-stained men about them
were of no more importance than were those wantons in the tapestry.
Without, dawn throbbed in heaven.  Without, innumerable birds were
raising that glad, piercing, hurried morning-song which very anciently
caused Adam's primal waking, to behold his mate.




BALTHAZAR'S DAUGHTER


"_A curious preference for the artificial should be mentioned as
characteristic of ALESSANDRO DE MEDICI'S poetry.  For his century was
anything but artless; the great commonplaces that form the main stock
of human thought were no longer in their first flush, and he addressed
a people no longer childish. . . .  Unquestionably his fancies were
fantastic, anti-natural, bordering on hallucination, and they betray a
desire for impossible novelty; but it is allowable to prefer them to
the sickly simplicity of those so-called poems that embroider with old
faded wools upon the canvas of worn-out truisms, trite, trivial and
idiotically sentimental patterns._"


  Let me have dames and damsels richly clad
    To feed and tend my mirth,
  Singing by day and night to make me glad;

  Let me have fruitful gardens of great girth
    Fill'd with the strife of birds,
  With water-springs, and beasts that house i' the earth.

  Let me seem Solomon for lore of words,
  Samson for strength, for beauty Absalom.

    Knights as my serfs be given;
  And as I will, let music go and come;
  Till, when I will, I will to enter Heaven.

  ALESSANDRO DE MEDICI.--_Madrigal, from D. G. Rossetti's version_.




BALTHAZAR'S DAUGHTER

Graciosa was Balthazar's youngest child, a white, slim girl with violet
eyes and strange pale hair which had the color and glitter of stardust.
"Some day at court," her father often thought complacently, "she, too,
will make a good match."  He was a necessitous lord, a smiling, supple
man who had already marketed two daughters to his advantage.  But
Graciosa's time was not yet mature in the year of grace 1533, for the
girl was not quite sixteen.  So Graciosa remained in Balthazar's big
cheerless house and was tutored in all needful accomplishments.  She
was proficient in the making of preserves and unguents, could play the
harpsichord and the virginals acceptably, could embroider an altarcloth
to admiration, and, in spite of a trivial lameness in walking, could
dance a coranto or a saraband against any woman between two seas.

Now to the north of Balthazar's home stood a tall forest, overhanging
both the highway and the river whose windings the highway followed.
Graciosa was very often to be encountered upon the outskirts of these
woods.  She loved the forest, whose tranquillity bred dreams, but was
already a woman in so far that she found it more interesting to watch
the highway.  Sometimes it would be deserted save for small purple
butterflies which fluttered about as if in continuous indecision, and
rarely ascended more than a foot above the ground.  But people passed
at intervals--as now a page, who was a notably fine fellow, clothed in
ash-colored gray, with slashed, puffed sleeves, and having a heron's
feather in his cap; or a Franciscan with his gown tucked up so that you
saw how the veins on his naked feet stood out like the carvings on a
vase; or a farmer leading a calf; or a gentleman in a mantle of
squirrel's fur riding beside a wonderful proud lady, whose tiny hat was
embroidered with pearls.  It was all very interesting to watch, it was
like turning over the leaves of a book written in an unknown tongue and
guessing what the pictures meant, because these people were intent upon
their private avocations, in which you had no part, and you would never
see them any more.

Then destiny took a hand in the affair and Guido came.  He reined his
gray horse at the sight of her sitting by the wayside and deferentially
inquired how far it might be to the nearest inn.  Graciosa told him.
He thanked her and rode on.  That was all, but the appraising glance of
this sedate and handsome burgher obscurely troubled the girl afterward.

Next day he came again.  He was a jewel-merchant, he told her, and he
thought it within the stretch of possibility that my lord Balthazar's
daughter might wish to purchase some of his wares.  She viewed them
with admiration, chaffered thriftily, and finally bought a topaz, dug
from Mount Zabarca, Guido assured her, which rendered its wearer immune
to terrors of any kind.

Very often afterward these two met on the outskirts of the forest as
Guido rode between the coast and the hill-country about his vocation.
Sometimes he laughingly offered her a bargain, on other days he paused
to exhibit a notable gem which he had procured for this or that wealthy
amateur.  Count Eglamore, the young Duke's favorite yonder at court,
bought most of them, it seemed.  "The nobles complain against this
upstart Eglamore very bitterly," said Guido, "but we merchants have no
quarrel with him.  He buys too lavishly."

"I trust I shall not see Count Eglamore when I go to court," said
Graciosa, meditatively; "and, indeed, by that time, my father assures
me, some honest gentleman will have contrived to cut the throat of this
abominable Eglamore."  Her father's people, it should be premised, had
been at bitter feud with the favorite ever since he detected and
punished the conspiracy of the Marquis of Cibo, their kinsman.  Then
Graciosa continued:  "Nevertheless, I shall see many beautiful sights
when I am taken to court. . . .  And the Duke, too, you tell me, is an
amateur of gems."

"Eh, madonna, I wish that you could see his jewels," cried Guido,
growing fervent; and he lovingly catalogued a host of lapidary marvels.

"I hope that I shall see these wonderful jewels when I go to court,"
said Graciosa wistfully.

"Duke Alessandro," he returned, his dark eyes strangely mirthful, "is,
as I take it, a catholic lover of beauty in all its forms.  So he will
show you his gems, very assuredly, and, worse still, he will make
verses in your honor.  For it is a preposterous feature of Duke
Alessandro's character that he is always making songs."

"Oh, and such strange songs as they are, too, Guido.  Who does not know
them?"

"I am not the best possible judge of his verses' merit," Guido
estimated, drily.  "But I shall never understand how any singer at all
came to be locked in such a prison.  I fancy that at times the paradox
puzzles even Duke Alessandro."

"And is he as handsome as people report?"

Then Guido laughed a little.  "Tastes differ, of course.  But I think
your father will assure you, madonna, that no duke possessing such a
zealous tax-collector as Count Eglamore was ever in his lifetime
considered of repulsive person."

"And is he young?"

"Why, as to that, he is about of an age with me, and in consequence old
enough to be far more sensible than either of us is ever likely to be,"
said Guido; and began to talk of other matters.

But presently Graciosa was questioning him again as to the court,
whither she was to go next year and enslave a marquis, or, at worst, an
opulent baron.  Her thoughts turned toward the court's predominating
figure.  "Tell me of Eglamore, Guido."

"Madonna, some say that Eglamore was a brewer's son.  Others--and your
father's kinsmen in particular--insist that he was begot by a devil in
person, just as Merlin was, and Plato the philosopher, and puissant
Alexander.  Nobody knows anything about his origin." Guido was sitting
upon the ground, his open pack between his knees.  Between the thumb
and forefinger of each hand he held caressingly a string of pearls
which he inspected as he talked.  "Nobody," he idly said, "nobody is
very eager to discuss Count Eglamore's origin now that Eglamore has
become indispensable to Duke Alessandro.  Yes, it is thanks to Eglamore
that the Duke has ample leisure and needful privacy for the pursuit of
recreations which are reputed to be curious."

"I do not understand you, Guido."  Graciosa was all wonder.

"It is perhaps as well," the merchant said, a trifle sadly.  Then Guido
shrugged.  "To be brief, madonna, business annoys the Duke.  He finds
in this Eglamore an industrious person who affixes seals, draughts
proclamations, makes treaties, musters armies, devises pageants, and
collects revenues, upon the whole, quite as efficiently as Alessandro
would be capable of doing these things.  So Alessandro makes verses and
amuses himself as his inclinations prompt, and Alessandro's people are
none the worse off on account of it."

"Heigho, I foresee that I shall never fall in love with the Duke,"
Graciosa declared.  "It is unbefitting and it is a little cowardly for
a prince to shirk the duties of his station.  Now, if I were Duke I
would grant my father a pension, and have Eglamore hanged, and purchase
a new gown of silvery green, in which I would be ravishingly beautiful,
and afterward-- Why, what would you do if you were Duke, Messer Guido?"

"What would I do if I were Duke?" he echoed.  "What would I do if I
were a great lord instead of a tradesman?  I think you know the answer,
madonna."

"Oh, you would make me your duchess, of course.  That is quite
understood," said Graciosa, with the lightest of laughs.  "But I was
speaking seriously, Guido."

Guido at that considered her intently for a half-minute.  His
countenance was of portentous gravity, but in his eyes she seemed to
detect a lurking impishness.

"And it is not a serious matter that a peddler of crystals should have
dared to love a nobleman's daughter?  You are perfectly right.  That I
worship you is an affair which does not concern any person save myself
in any way whatsoever, although I think that knowledge of the fact
would put your father to the trouble of sharpening his dagger. . . .
Indeed, I am not certain that I worship you, for in order to adore
wholeheartedly, the idolater must believe his idol to be perfect.  Now,
your nails are of an ugly shape, like that of little fans; your mouth
is too large; and I have long ago perceived that you are a trifle lame
in spite of your constant care to conceal the fact.  I do not admire
these faults, for faults they are undoubtedly.  Then, too, I know you
are vain and self-seeking, and look forward contentedly to the time
when your father will transfer his ownership of such physical
attractions as heaven gave you to that nobleman who offers the highest
price for them.  It is true you have no choice in the matter, but you
will participate in a monstrous bargain, and I would prefer to have you
exhibit distaste for it."  And with that he returned composedly to
inspection of his pearls.

"And to what end, Guido?"  It was the first time Graciosa had
completely waived the reticence of a superior caste.  You saw that the
child's parted lips were tremulous, and you divined her childish fits
of dreading that glittering, inevitable court-life shared with an
unimaginable husband.

But Guido only grumbled whimsically.  "I am afraid that men do not
always love according to the strict laws of logic.  I desire your
happiness above all things; yet to see you so abysmally untroubled by
anything that troubles me is another matter."

"But I am not untroubled, Guido----" she began swiftly.  Graciosa broke
off in speech, shrugged, flashed a smile at him.  "For I cannot fathom
you, Ser Guido, and that troubles me.  Yes, I am very fond of you, and
yet I do not trust you.  You tell me you love me greatly.  It pleases
me to have you say this.  You perceive I am very candid this morning,
Messer Guido.  Yes, it pleases me, and I know that for the sake of
seeing me you daily endanger your life, for if my father heard of our
meetings he would have you killed.  You would not incur such
hare-brained risks unless you cared very greatly; and yet, somehow, I
do not believe it is altogether for me you care."

Then Guido was in train to protest an all-mastering and entirely candid
devotion, but he was interrupted.

"Most women have these awkward intuitions," spoke a melodious voice,
and turning, Graciosa met the eyes of the intruder.  This magnificent
young man had a proud and bloodless face which contrasted sharply with
his painted lips and cheeks.  In the contour of his protruding mouth
showed plainly his negroid ancestry.  His scanty beard, as well as his
frizzled hair, was the color of dead grass.  He was sumptuously clothed
in white satin worked with silver, and around his cap was a gold chain
hung with diamonds.  Now he handed his fringed riding-gloves to Guido
to hold.

"Yes, madonna, I suspect that Eglamore here cares greatly for the fact
that you are Lord Balthazar's daughter, and cousin to the late Marquis
of Cibo.  For Cibo has many kinsmen at court who still resent the
circumstance that the matching of his wits against Eglamore's earned
for Cibo a deplorably public demise.  So they conspire against Eglamore
with vexatious industry, as an upstart, as a nobody thrust over people
of proven descent, and Eglamore goes about in hourly apprehension of a
knife-thrust.  If he could make a match with you, though, your
father--thrifty man!--would be easily appeased.  Your cousins, those
proud, grumbling Castel-Franchi, Strossi and Valori, would not prove
over-obdurate toward a kinsman who, whatever his past indiscretions,
has so many pensions and offices at his disposal.  Yes, honor would
permit a truce, and Eglamore could bind them to his interests within
ten days, and be rid of the necessity of sleeping in chain armor. . . .
Have I not unraveled the scheme correctly, Eglamore?"

"Your highness was never lacking in penetration," replied the other in
a dull voice.  He stood motionless, holding the gloves, his shoulders a
little bowed as if under some physical load.  His eyes were fixed upon
the ground.  He divined the change in Graciosa's face and did not care
to see it.

"And so you are Count Eglamore," said Graciosa in a sort of whisper.
"That is very strange.  I had thought you were my friend, Guido.  But I
forget.  I must not call you Guido any longer."  She gave a little
shiver here.  He stayed motionless and did not look at her.  "I have
often wondered what manner of man you were.  So it was you--whose hand
I touched just now--you who poisoned Duke Cosmo, you who had the good
cardinal assassinated, you who betrayed the brave lord of Faenza!  Oh,
yes, they openly accuse you of every imaginable crime--this patient
Eglamore, this reptile who has crept into his power through filthy
passages.  It is very strange you should be capable of so much
wickedness, for to me you seem only a sullen lackey."

He winced and raised his eyes at this.  His face remained
expressionless.  He knew these accusations at least to be demonstrable
lies, for as it happened he had never found his advancement to hinge
upon the commission of the crimes named.  But even so, the past was a
cemetery he did not care to have revivified.

"And it was you who detected the Marquis of Cibo's conspiracy.
Tebaldeo was my cousin, Count Eglamore, and I loved him.  We were
reared together.  We used to play here in these woods, and I remember
how Tebaldeo once fetched me a wren's nest from that maple yonder.  I
stood just here.  I was weeping because I was afraid he would fall.  If
he had fallen and been killed, it would have been the luckier for him,"
Graciosa sighed.  "They say that he conspired.  I do not know.  I only
know that by your orders, Count Eglamore, my playmate Tebaldeo was
fastened upon a Saint Andrew's cross and his arms and legs were each
broken in two places with an iron bar.  Then your servants took
Tebaldeo, still living, and laid him upon a carriage-wheel which was
hung upon a pivot.  The upper edge of this wheel was cut with very fine
teeth like those of a saw, so that his agony might be complete.
Tebaldeo's poor mangled legs were folded beneath his body so that his
heels touched the back of his head, they tell me.  In such a posture he
died very slowly while the wheel turned very slowly there in the sunlit
market-place, and flies buzzed greedily about him, and the shopkeepers
took holiday in order to watch Tebaldeo die--the same Tebaldeo who once
fetched me a wren's nest from yonder maple."

Eglamore spoke now.  "I gave orders for the Marquis of Cibo's
execution.  I did not devise the manner of his death.  The punishment
for Cibo's crime was long ago fixed by our laws.  Cibo plotted to kill
the Duke.  Cibo confessed as much."

But the girl waved this aside.  "And then you plan this masquerade.
You plan to make me care for you so greatly that even when I know you
to be Count Eglamore I must still care for you.  You plan to marry me,
so as to placate Tebaldeo's kinsmen, so as to bind them to your
interests.  It was a fine bold stroke of policy, I know, to use me as a
stepping-stone to safety--but was it fair to me?"  Her voice rose now a
little.  She seemed to plead with him.  "Look you, Count Eglamore, I
was a child only yesterday.  I have never loved any man.  But you have
loved many women, I know, and long experience has taught you many ways
of moving a woman's heart.  Oh, was it fair, was it worth while, to
match your skill against my ignorance?  Think how unhappy I would be if
even now I loved you, and how I would loathe myself. . . .  But I am
getting angry over nothing.  Nothing has happened except that I have
dreamed in idle moments of a brave and comely lover who held his head
so high that all other women envied me, and now I have awakened."

Meanwhile, it was with tears in his eyes that the young man in white
had listened to her quiet talk, for you could nowhere have found a
nature more readily sensitive than his to all the beauty and wonder
which life, as if it were haphazardly, produces every day.  He pitied
this betrayed child quite ineffably, because in her sorrow she was so
pretty.

So he spoke consolingly.  "Fie, Donna Graciosa, you must not be too
harsh with Eglamore.  It is his nature to scheme, and he weaves his
plots as inevitably as the spider does her web.  Believe me, it is
wiser to forget the rascal--as I do--until there is need of him; and I
think you will have no more need to consider Eglamore's trickeries, for
you are very beautiful, Graciosa."

He had drawn closer to the girl, and he brought a cloying odor of
frangipani, bergamot and vervain.  His nostrils quivered, his face had
taken on an odd pinched look, for all that he smiled as over some
occult jest.  Graciosa was a little frightened by his bearing, which
was both furtive and predatory.

"Oh, do not be offended, for I have some rights to say what I desire in
these parts.  For, _Dei gratia_, I am the overlord of these parts,
Graciosa--a neglected prince who wondered over the frequent absences of
his chief counselor and secretly set spies upon him.  Eglamore here
will attest as much.  Or if you cannot believe poor Eglamore any
longer, I shall have other witnesses within the half-hour.  Oh, yes,
they are to meet me here at noon--some twenty crop-haired stalwart
cut-throats.  They will come riding upon beautiful broad-chested horses
covered with red velvet trappings that are hung with little silver
bells which jingle delightfully.  They will come very soon, and then we
will ride back to court."

Duke Alessandro touched his big painted mouth with his forefinger as if
in fantastic mimicry of a man imparting a confidence.

"I think that I shall take you with me, Graciosa, for you are very
beautiful.  You are as slim as a lily and more white, and your eyes are
two purple mirrors in each of which I see a tiny image of Duke
Alessandro.  The woman I loved yesterday was a big splendid wench with
cheeks like apples.  It is not desirable that women should be so large.
All women should be little creatures that fear you.  They should have
thin, plaintive voices, and in shrinking from you be as slight to the
touch as a cobweb.  It is not possible to love a woman ardently unless
you comprehend how easy it would be to murder her."

"God, God!" said Count Eglamore, very softly, for he was familiar with
the look which had now come into Duke Alessandro's face.  Indeed, all
persons about court were quick to notice this odd pinched look, like
that of a traveler nipped at by frosts, and people at court became
obsequious within the instant in dealing with the fortunate woman who
had aroused this look, Count Eglamore remembered.

And the girl did not speak at all, but stood motionless, staring in
bewildered, pitiable, childlike fashion, and the color had ebbed from
her countenance.

Alessandro was frankly pleased.  "You fear me, do you not, Graciosa?
See, now, when I touch your hand it is soft and cold as a serpent's
skin, and you shudder.  I am very tired of women who love me, of all
women with bold, hungry eyes.  To you my touch will always be a
martyrdom, you will always loathe me, and therefore I shall not weary
of you for a long while.  Come, Graciosa.  Your father shall have all
the wealth and state that even his greedy imaginings can devise, so
long as you can contrive to loathe me.  We will find you a suitable
husband.  You shall have flattery and titles, gold and fine glass, soft
stuffs and superb palaces such as are your beauty's due henceforward."

He glanced at the peddler's pack, and shrugged.  "So Eglamore has been
wooing you with jewels!  You must see mine, dear Graciosa.  It is not
merely an affair of possessing, as some emperors do, all the four kinds
of sapphires, the twelve kinds of emeralds, the three kinds of rubies,
and many extraordinary pearls, diamonds, cymophanes, beryls, green
peridots, tyanos, sandrastra, and fiery cinnamon-stones"--he enumerated
them with the tender voice of their lover--"for the value of these may
at least be estimated.  Oh, no, I have in my possession gems which have
not their fellows in any other collection, gems which have not even a
name and the value of which is incalculable--strange jewels that were
shot from inaccessible mountain peaks by means of slings, jewels
engendered by the thunder, jewels taken from the heart of the Arabian
deer, jewels cut from the brain of a toad and the eyes of serpents, and
even jewels that are authentically known to have fallen from the moon.
We will select the rarest, and have a pair of slippers encrusted with
them, in which you shall dance for me."

"Highness," cried Eglamore, with anger and terror at odds in his
breast, "Highness, I love this girl!"

"Ah, then you cannot ever be her husband," Duke Alessandro returned.
"You would have suited otherwise.  No, no, we must seek out some other
person of discretion.  It will all be very amusing, for I think that
she is now quite innocent, as pure as the high angels are.  See,
Eglamore, she cannot speak, she stays still as a lark that has been
taken in a snare.  It will be very marvelous to make her as I
am. . . ." He meditated, as, obscurely aware of opposition, his
shoulders twitched fretfully, and momentarily his eyes lightened like
the glare of a cannon through its smoke.  "You made a beast of me, some
long-faced people say.  Beware lest the beast turn and rend you."

Count Eglamore plucked aimlessly at his chin.  Then he laughed as a dog
yelps.  He dropped the gloves which he had held till this,
deliberately, as if the act were a rite.  His shoulders straightened
and purpose seemed to flow into the man.  "No," he said quietly, "I
will not have it.  It was not altogether I who made a brain-sick beast
of you, my prince; but even so, I have never been too nice to profit by
your vices.  I have taken my thrifty toll of abomination, I have stood
by contentedly, not urging you on, yet never trying to stay you, as you
waded deeper and ever deeper into the filth of your debaucheries,
because meanwhile you left me so much power.  Yes, in some part it is
my own handiwork which is my ruin.  I accept it.  Nevertheless, you
shall not harm this child."

"I venture to remind you, Eglamore, that I am still the master of this
duchy."  Alessandro was languidly amused, and had begun to regard his
adversary with real curiosity.

"Oh, yes, but that is nothing to me.  At court you are the master.  At
court I have seen mothers raise the veil from their daughters' faces,
with smiles that were more loathsome than the grimaces of a fiend,
because you happened to be passing.  But here in these woods, your
highness, I see only the woman I love and the man who has insulted her."

"This is very admirable fooling," the Duke considered.  "So all the
world is changed and Pandarus is transformed into Hector?  These are
sonorous words, Eglamore, but with what deeds do you propose to back
them?"

"By killing you, your highness."

"So!" said the Duke.  "The farce ascends in interest." He drew with a
flourish, with actual animation, for sottish, debauched and
power-crazed as this man was, he came of a race to whom danger was a
cordial.  "Very luckily a sword forms part of your disguise, so let us
amuse ourselves.  It is always diverting to kill, and if by any chance
you kill me I shall at least be rid of the intolerable knowledge that
to-morrow will be just like to-day."  The Duke descended blithely into
the level road and placed himself on guard.

Then both men silently went about the business in hand.  Both were
oddly calm, almost as if preoccupied by some more important matter to
be settled later.  The two swords clashed, gleamed rigidly for an
instant, and then their rapid interplay, so far as vision went, melted
into a flickering snarl of silver, for the sun was high and each man's
shadow was huddled under him.  Then Eglamore thrust savagely and in the
act trod the edge of a puddle, and fell ignominiously prostrate.  His
sword was wrenched ten feet from him, for the Duke had parried
skilfully.  Eglamore lay thus at Alessandro's mercy.

"Well, well!" the Duke cried petulantly, "and am I to be kept waiting
forever?  You were a thought quicker in obeying my caprices yesterday.
Get up, you muddy lout, and let us kill each other with some pretension
of adroitness."

Eglamore rose, and, sobbing, caught up his sword and rushed toward the
Duke in an agony of shame and rage.  His attack now was that of a
frenzied animal, quite careless of defense and desirous only of murder.
Twice the Duke wounded him, but it was Alessandro who drew backward,
composedly hindering the brutal onslaught he was powerless to check.
Then Eglamore ran him through the chest and gave vent to a strangled,
growling cry as Alessandro fell.  Eglamore wrenched his sword free and
grasped it by the blade so that he might stab the Duke again and again.
He meant to hack the abominable flesh, to slash and mutilate that
haughty mask of infamy, but Graciosa clutched his weapon by the hilt.

The girl panted, and her breath came thick.  "He gave you your life."

Eglamore looked up.  She leaned now upon his shoulder, her face
brushing his as he knelt over the unconscious Duke; and Eglamore found
that at her dear touch all passion had gone out of him.

"Madonna," he said equably, "the Duke is not yet dead.  It is
impossible to let him live.  You may think he voiced only a caprice
just now.  I think so too, but I know the man, and I know that all this
madman's whims are ruthless and irresistible.  Living, Duke
Alessandro's appetites are merely whetted by opposition, so much so
that he finds no pleasures sufficiently piquant unless they have God's
interdiction as a sauce.  Living, he will make of you his plaything,
and a little later his broken, soiled and castby plaything.  It is
therefore necessary that I kill Duke Alessandro."

She parted from him, and he too rose to his feet.

"And afterward," she said quietly, "and afterward you must die just as
Tebaldeo died."

"That is the law, madonna.  But whether Alessandro enters hell to-day
or later, I am a lost man."

"Oh, that is very true," she said.  "A moment since you were Count
Eglamore, whom every person feared.  Now there is not a beggar in the
kingdom who would change lots with you, for you are a friendless and
hunted man in peril of dreadful death.  But even so, you are not
penniless, Count Eglamore, for these jewels here which formed part of
your masquerade are of great value, and there is a world outside.  The
frontier is not two miles distant.  You have only to escape into the
hill-country beyond the forest, and you need not kill Duke Alessandro
after all.  I would have you go hence with hands as clean as possible."

"Perhaps I might escape."  He found it quaint to note how calm she was
and how tranquilly his own thoughts ran.  "But first the Duke must die,
because I dare not leave you to his mercy."

"How does that matter?" she returned.  "You know very well that my
father intends to market me as best suits his interests.  Here I am so
much merchandise.  The Duke is as free as any other man to cry a
bargain." He would have spoken in protest, but Graciosa interrupted
wearily:  "Oh, yes, it is to this end only that we daughters of Duke
Alessandro's vassals are nurtured, just as you told me--eh, how long
ago!--that such physical attractions as heaven accords us may be
marketed.  And I do not see how a wedding can in any way ennoble the
transaction by causing it to profane a holy sacrament.  Ah, no,
Balthazar's daughter was near attaining all that she had been taught to
desire, for a purchaser came and he bid lavishly.  You know very well
that my father would have been delighted.  But you must need upset the
bargain.  'No, I will not have it!' Count Eglamore must cry.  It cost
you very highly to speak those words.  I think it would have puzzled my
father to hear those words at which so many fertile lands, stout
castles, well-timbered woodlands, herds of cattle, gilded coaches,
liveries and curious tapestries, fine clothing and spiced foods, all
vanished like a puff of smoke.  Ah, yes, my father would have thought
you mad."

"I had no choice," he said, and waved a little gesture of impotence.
He spoke as with difficulty, almost wearily.  "I love you.  It is a
theme on which I do not embroider.  So long as I had thought to use you
as an instrument I could woo fluently enough.  To-day I saw that you
were frightened and helpless--oh, quite helpless.  And something
changed in me.  I knew for the first time that I loved you and that I
was not clean as you are clean.  What it was of passion and horror, of
despair and adoration and yearning, which struggled in my being then I
cannot tell you.  It spurred me to such action as I took,--but it has
robbed me of sugared eloquence, it has left me chary of speech.  It is
necessary that I climb very high because of my love for you, and upon
the heights there is silence."

And Graciosa meditated.  "Here I am so much merchandise.  Heigho, since
I cannot help it, since bought and sold I must be, one day or another,
at least I will go at a noble price.  Yet I do not think I am quite
worth the value of these castles and lands and other things which you
gave up because of me, so that it will be necessary to make up the
difference, dear, by loving you very much."

And at that he touched her chin, gently and masterfully, for Graciosa
would have averted her face, and it seemed to Eglamore that he could
never have his fill of gazing on the radiant, shamed tenderness of
Graciosa's face.  "Oh, my girl!" he whispered.  "Oh, my wonderful,
worshiped, merry girl, whom God has fashioned with such loving care!
you who had only scorn to give me when I was a kingdom's master! and
would you go with me now that I am friendless and homeless?"

"But I shall always have a friend," she answered--"a friend who showed
me what Balthazar's daughter was and what love is.  And I am vain
enough to believe I shall not ever be very far from home so long as I
am near to my friend's heart."

A mortal man could not but take her in his arms.

"Farewell, Duke Alessandro!" then said Eglamore; "farewell, poor clay
so plastic the least touch remodels you!  I had a part in shaping you
so bestial; our age, too, had a part--our bright and cruel day, wherein
you were set too high.  Yet for me it would perhaps have proved as easy
to have made a learned recluse of you, Alessandro, or a bloodless
saint, if to do that had been as patently profitable.  For you and all
your kind are so much putty in the hands of circumspect fellows such as
I.  But I stood by and let our poisoned age conform that putty into the
shape of a crazed beast, because it took that form as readily as any
other, and in taking it, best served my selfish ends.  Now I must pay
for that sorry shaping, just as, I think, you too must pay some day.
And so, I cry farewell with loathing, but with compassion also!"

Then these two turned toward the hills, leaving Duke Alessandro where
he lay in the road, a very lamentable figure in much bloodied finery.
They turned toward the hills, and entered a forest whose ordering was
time's contemporary, and where there was no grandeur save that of the
trees.

But upon the summit of the nearest hill they paused and looked over a
restless welter of foliage that glittered in the sun, far down into the
highway.  It bustled like an unroofed ant-hill, for the road was alive
with men who seemed from this distance very small.  Duke Alessandro's
attendants had found him and were clustered in a hubbub about their
reviving master.  Dwarfish Lorenzino de Medici was the most solicitous
among them.

Beyond was the broad river, seen as a ribbon of silver now, and on its
remoter bank the leaded roofs of a strong fortress glistened like a
child's new toy.  Tilled fields showed here and there, no larger in
appearance than so many outspread handkerchiefs.  Far down in the east
a small black smudge upon the pearl-colored and vaporous horizon was
all they could discern of a walled city filled with factories for the
working of hemp and furs and alum and silk and bitumen.

"It is a very rich and lovely land," said Eglamore--"this kingdom which
a half-hour since lay in the hollow of my hand."  He viewed it for a
while, and not without pensiveness.  Then he took Graciosa's hand and
looked into her face, and he laughed joyously.




JUDITH'S CREED


"_It does not appear that the age thought his works worthy of
posterity, nor that this great poet himself levied any ideal tribute on
future times, or had any further prospect than of present popularity
and present profit.  So careless was he, indeed, of fame, that, when he
retired to ease and plenty, while he was yet little declined into the
vale of years, and before he could be disgusted with fatigue or
disabled by infirmity, he desired only that in this rural quiet he who
had so long mazed his imagination by following phantoms might at last
be cured of his delirious ecstasies, and as a hermit might estimate the
transactions of the world._"




  Now my charms are all o'erthrown,
  And what strength I have's my own,
  Which is most faint.

                    Now I want
  Spirits to enforce, art to enchant;
  And my ending is despair,
  Unless I be relieved by prayer,
  Which pierces so, that it assaults
  Mercy itself, and frees all faults.

  As you from crimes would pardon'd be,
  Let your indulgence set me free.

  WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE.--_Epilogue to The Tempest_.



He was hoping, while his fingers drummed in unison with the beat of his
verse, that this last play at least would rouse enthusiasm in the pit.
The welcome given its immediate predecessors had undeniably been tepid.
A memorandum at his elbow of the receipts at the Globe for the last
quarter showed this with disastrous bluntness; and, after all, in 1609
a shareholder in a theater, when writing dramas for production there,
was ordinarily subject to more claims than those of his ideals.

He sat in a neglected garden whose growth was in reversion to primal
habits.  The season was September, the sky a uniform and temperate
blue.  A peachtree, laden past its strength with fruitage, made about
him with its boughs a sort of tent.  The grass around his writing-table
was largely hidden by long, crinkled peach leaves--some brown and
others gray as yet--and was dotted with a host of brightly-colored
peaches.  Fidgeting bees and flies were excavating the decayed spots in
this wasting fruit, from which emanated a vinous odor.  The bees hummed
drowsily, their industry facilitating idleness in others.  It was
curious--he meditated, his thoughts straying from "an uninhabited
island"--how these insects alternated in color between brown velvet and
silver, as they blundered about a flickering tessellation of amber and
dark green . . . in search of rottenness. . . .

He frowned.  Here was an arid forenoon as imagination went.  A seasoned
plagiarist by this, he opened a book which lay upon the table among
several others and duly found the chapter entitled _Of the Cannibals_.

"So, so!" he said aloud.  "'It is a nation,' would I answer Plato,
'that has no kind of traffic, no knowledge of letters----'"  And with
that he sat about reshaping Montaigne's conceptions of Utopia into
verse.  He wrote--while his left hand held the book flat--as orderly as
any county-clerk might do in the recordance of a deed of sale.

Midcourse in larceny, he looked up from writing.  He saw a tall, dark
lady who was regarding him half-sorrowfully and half as in the grasp of
some occult amusement.  He said nothing.  He released the telltale
book.  His eyebrows lifted, banteringly.  He rose.

He found it characteristic of her that she went silently to the table
and compared the printed page with what he had just written.  "So
nowadays you have turned pickpocket?  My poet, you have altered."

He said:  "Why, yes.  When you broke off our friendship, I paid you the
expensive compliment of falling very ill.  They thought that I would
die.  They tell me even to-day I did not die.  I almost question it."
He shrugged.  "And to-day I must continue to write plays, because I
never learned any other trade.  And so, at need, I pilfer."  The topic
did not seem much to concern him.

"Eh, and such plays!" the woman cried.  "My poet, there was a time when
you created men and women as glibly as Heaven does.  Now you make
sugar-candy dolls."

"The last comedies were not all I could have wished," he assented.  "In
fact, I got only some L30 clear profit."

"There speaks the little tradesman I most hated of all persons living!"
the woman sighed.  Now, as in impatience, she thrust back her
traveling-hood and stood bare-headed.

Then she stayed silent,--tall, extraordinarily pallid, and with dark,
steady eyes.  Their gaze by ordinary troubled you, as seeming to hint
some knowledge to your belittlement.  The playmaker remembered that.
Now he, a reputable householder, was wondering what would be the upshot
of this intrusion.  His visitor, as he was perfectly aware, had little
patience with such moments of life as could not be made dramatic. . . .
He was recollecting many trifles, now his mind ran upon old
times. . . .  No, no, reflection assured him, to call her beautiful
would be, and must always have been, an exaggeration; but to deny the
exotic and somewhat sinister charm of her, even to-day, would be an
absurdity.

She said, abruptly:  "I do not think I ever loved you as women love
men.  You were too anxious to associate with fine folk, too eager to
secure a patron--yes, and to get your profit of him--and you were
always ill-at-ease among us.  Our youth is so long past, and we two are
so altered that we, I think, may speak of its happenings now without
any bitterness.  I hated those sordid, petty traits.  I raged at your
incessant pretensions to gentility because I knew you to be so much
more than a gentleman.  Oh, it infuriated me--how long ago it was!--to
see you cringing to the Court blockheads, and running their errands,
and smirkingly pocketing their money, and wheedling them into helping
the new play to success.  You complained I treated you like a lackey;
it was not unnatural when of your own freewill you played the lackey so
assiduously."

He laughed.  He had anatomized himself too frequently and with too much
dispassion to overlook whatever tang of snobbishness might be in him;
and, moreover, the charge thus tendered became in reality the speaker's
apology, and hurt nobody's self-esteem.

"Faith, I do not say you are altogether in the wrong," he assented.
"They could be very useful to me--Pembroke, and Southampton, and those
others--and so I endeavored to render my intimacy acceptable.  It was
my business as a poet to make my play as near perfect as I could; and
this attended to, common-sense demanded of the theater-manager that he
derive as much money as was possible from its representation.  What
would you have?  The man of letters, like the carpenter or the
blacksmith, must live by the vending of his productions, not by the
eating of them." The woman waved this aside.

She paced the grass in meditation, the peach leaves brushing her proud
head--caressingly, it seemed to him.  Later she came nearer in a
brand-new mood.  She smiled now, and her voice was musical and thrilled
with wonder.  "But what a poet Heaven had locked inside this little
parasite!  It used to puzzle me."  She laughed, and ever so lightly.
"Eh, and did you never understand why by preference I talked with you
at evening from my balcony?  It was because I could forget you then
entirely.  There was only a voice in the dark.  There was a sorcerer at
whose bidding words trooped like a conclave of emperors, and now sang
like a bevy of linnets.  And wit and fancy and high aspirations and my
love--because I knew then that your love for me was splendid and
divine--these also were my sorcerer's potent allies.  I understood then
how glad and awed were those fabulous Greekish queens when a god wooed
them.  Yes, then I understood.  How long ago it seems!"

"Yes, yes," he sighed.  "In that full-blooded season was Guenevere a
lass, I think, and Charlemagne was not yet in breeches."

"And when there was a new play enacted I was glad.  For it was our play
that you and I had polished the last line of yesterday, and all these
people wept and laughed because of what we had done.  And I was
proud----"  The lady shrugged impatiently.  "Proud, did I say? and
glad?  That attests how woefully I fall short of you, my poet.  You
would have found some magic phrase to make that ancient glory
articulate, I know.  Yet,--did I ever love you?  I do not know that.  I
only know I sometimes fear you robbed me of the power of loving any
other man."

He raised one hand in deprecation.  "I must remind you," he cried,
whimsically, "that a burnt child dreads even to talk of fire."

Her response was a friendly nod.  She came yet nearer.  "What," she
demanded, and her smile was elfish, "what if I had lied to you?  What
if I were hideously tired of my husband, that bluff, stolid captain?
What if I wanted you to plead with me as in the old time?"

He said:  "Until now you were only a woman.  Oh, and now, my dear, you
are again that resistless gipsy who so merrily beguiled me to the very
heart of loss.  You are Love.  You are Youth.  You are Comprehension.
You are all that I have had, and lost, and vainly hunger for.  Here in
this abominable village, there is no one who understands--not even
those who are more dear to me than you are.  I know.  I only spoil good
paper which might otherwise be profitably used to wrap herrings in,
they think.  They give me ink and a pen just as they would give toys to
a child who squalled for them too obstinately.  And Poesy is a thrifty
oracle with no words to waste upon the deaf, however loudly her
interpreter cry out to her.  Oh, I have hungered for you, my proud,
dark lady!" the playmaker said.

Afterward they stood quite silent.  She was not unmoved by his outcry;
and for this very reason was obscurely vexed by the reflection that it
would be the essay of a braver man to remedy, rather than to lament,
his circumstances.  And then the moment's rapture failed him.

"I am a sorry fool," he said; and lightly he ran on:  "You are a
skilful witch.  Yet you have raised the ghost of an old madness to no
purpose.  You seek a master-poet?  You will find none here.  Perhaps I
was one once.  But most of us are poets of one sort or another when we
love.  Do you not understand?  To-day I do not love you any more than I
do Hecuba.  Is it not strange that I should tell you this and not be
moved at all?  Is it not laughable that we should stand here at the
last, two feet apart as things physical go, and be as profoundly
severed as if an ocean tumbled between us?"

He fell to walking to and fro, his hands behind his back.  She waited,
used as she was to his unstable temperament, a trifle puzzled.
Presently he spoke:

"There was a time when a master-poet was needed.  He was
found--nay,--rather made.  Fate hastily caught up a man not very
different from the run of men--one with a taste for stringing phrases
and with a comedy or so to his discredit.  Fate merely bid him love a
headstrong child newly released from the nursery."

"We know her well enough," she said.  "The girl was faithless, and
tyrannous, and proud, and coquettish, and unworthy, and false, and
inconstant.  She was black as hell and dark as night in both her person
and her living.  You were not niggardly of vituperation."

And he grimaced.  "Faith," he replied, "but sonnets are a more natural
form of expression than affidavits, and they are made effective by
compliance with different rules.  I find no flagrant fault with you
to-day.  You were a child of seventeen, the darling of a noble house,
and an actor--yes, and not even a pre-eminent actor--a gross, poor
posturing vagabond, just twice your age, presumed to love you.  What
child would not amuse herself with such engaging toys?  Vivacity and
prettiness and cruelty are the ordinary attributes of kittenhood.  So
you amused yourself.  And I submitted with clear eyes, because I could
not help it.  Yes, I who am by nature not disposed to underestimate my
personal importance--I submitted, because your mockery was more
desirable than the adoration of any other woman.  And all this helped
to make a master-poet of me.  Eh, why not, when such monstrous passions
spoke through me--as if some implacable god elected to play godlike
music on a mountebank's lute?  And I made admirable plays.  Why not,
when there was no tragedy more poignant than mine?--and where in any
comedy was any figure one-half so ludicrous as mine?  Ah, yes, Fate
gained her ends, as always."

He was a paunchy, inconsiderable little man.  By ordinary his elongated
features and high, bald forehead loaned him an aspect of serene and
axiom-based wisdom, much as we see him in his portraits; but now his
countenance was flushed and mobile.  Odd passions played about it, as
when on a sullen night in August summer lightnings flicker and merge.

His voice had found another cadence.  "But Fate was not entirely
ruthless.  Fate bade the child become a woman, and so grow tired of all
her childhood's playthings.  This was after a long while, as we
estimate happenings. . . .  I suffered then.  Yes, I went down to the
doors of death, as people say, in my long illness.  But that crude,
corporal fever had a providential thievishness; and not content with
stripping me of health and strength,--not satisfied with pilfering
inventiveness and any strong hunger to create--why, that insatiable
fever even robbed me of my insanity.  I lived.  I was only a broken
instrument flung by because the god had wearied of playing.  I would
give forth no more heart-wringing music, for the musician had departed.
And I still lived--I, the stout little tradesman whom you loathed.
Yes, that tradesman scrambled through these evils, somehow, and came
out still able to word adequately all such imaginings as could be
devised by his natural abilities.  But he transmitted no more
heart-wringing music."

She said, "You lie!"

He said, "I thank Heaven daily that I do not."  He spoke the truth.
She knew it, and her heart was all rebellion.

Indefatigable birds sang through the following hush.  A wholesome and
temperate breeze caressed these silent people.  Bees that would die
to-morrow hummed about them tirelessly.

Then the poet said:  "I loved you; and you did not love me.  It is the
most commonplace of tragedies, the heart of every man alive has been
wounded in this identical fashion.  A master-poet is only that wounded
man--among so many other bleeding folk--who perversely augments his
agony, and utilizes his wound as an inkwell.  Presently time scars over
the cut for him, as time does for all the others.  He does not suffer
any longer.  No, and such relief is a clear gain; but none the less, he
must henceforward write with ordinary ink such as the lawyers use."

"I should have been the man," the woman cried.  "Had I been sure of
fame, could I have known those raptures when you used to gabble
immortal phrases like a stammering infant, I would have paid the price
without all this whimpering."

"Faith, and I think you would have," he assented.  "There is the
difference.  At bottom I am a creature of the most moderate
aspirations, as you always complained; and for my part, Fate must in
reason demand her applause of posterity rather than of me.  For I
regret the unlived life that I was meant for--the comfortable level
life of little happenings which all my schoolfellows have passed
through in a stolid drove.  I was equipped to live that life with
relish, and that life only; and it was denied me.  It was demolished in
order that a book or two be made out of its wreckage."

She said, with half-shut eyes:  "There is a woman at the root of all
this."  And how he laughed!

"Did I not say you were a witch?  Why, most assuredly there is."

He motioned with his left hand.  Some hundred yards away a young man,
who was carrying two logs toward New Place, had paused to rest.  A girl
was with him.  Now laughingly she was pretending to assist the porter
in lifting his burden.  It was a quaintly pretty vignette, as framed by
the peach leaves, because those two young people were so merry and so
candidly in love.  A symbolist might have wrung pathos out of the
girl's desire to aid, as set against her fond inadequacy; and the
attendant playwright made note of it.

"Well, well!" he said:  "Young Quiney is a so-so choice, since women
must necessarily condescend to intermarrying with men.  But he is far
from worthy of her.  Tell me, now, was there ever a rarer piece of
beauty?"

"The wench is not ill-favored," was the dark lady's unenthusiastic
answer.  "So!--but who is she?"

He replied:  "She is my daughter.  Yonder you see my latter muse for
whose dear sake I spin romances.  I do not mean that she takes any
lively interest in them.  That is not to be expected, since she cannot
read or write.  Ask her about the poet we were discussing, and I very
much fear Judith will bluntly inform you she cannot tell a B from a
bull's foot.  But one must have a muse of some sort or another; and so
I write about the world now as Judith sees it.  My Judith finds this
world an eminently pleasant place.  It is full of laughter and
kindliness--for could Herod be unkind to her?--and it is largely
populated by ardent young fellows who are intended chiefly to be
twisted about your fingers; and it is illuminated by sunlight whose
real purpose is to show how pretty your hair is.  And if affairs go
badly for a while, and you have done nothing very wrong--why, of
course, Heaven will soon straighten matters satisfactorily.  For
nothing that happens to us can possibly be anything except a benefit,
because God orders all happenings, and God loves us.  There you have
Judith's creed; and upon my word, I believe there is a great deal to be
said for it."

"And this is you," she cried--"you who wrote of Troilus and Timon!"

"I lived all that," he replied--"I lived it, and so for a long while I
believed in the existence of wickedness.  To-day I have lost many
illusions, madam, and that ranks among them.  I never knew a wicked
person.  I question if anybody ever did.  Undoubtedly short-sighted
people exist who have floundered into ill-doing; but it proves always
to have been on account of either cowardice or folly, and never because
of malevolence; and, in consequence, their sorry pickle should demand
commiseration far more loudly than our blame.  In short, I find
humanity to be both a weaker and a better-meaning race than I had
suspected.  And so, I make what you call 'sugar-candy dolls,' because I
very potently believe that all of us are sweet at heart.  Oh no! men
lack an innate aptitude for sinning; and at worst, we frenziedly
attempt our misdemeanors just as a sheep retaliates on its pursuers.
This much, at least, has Judith taught me."

The woman murmured:  "Eh, you are luckier than I.  I had a son.  He was
borne of my anguish, he was fed and tended by me, and he was dependent
on me in all things."  She said, with a half-sob, "My poet, he was so
little and so helpless!  Now he is dead."

"My dear, my dear!" he cried, and he took both her hands.  "I also had
a son.  He would have been a man by this."

They stood thus for a while.  And then he smiled.

"I ask your pardon.  I had forgotten that you hate to touch my hands.
I know--they are too moist and flabby.  I always knew that you thought
that.  Well!  Hamnet died.  I grieved.  That is a trivial thing to say.
But you also have seen your own flesh lying in a coffin so small that
even my soft hands could lift it.  So you will comprehend.  To-day I
find that the roughest winds abate with time.  Hatred and self-seeking
and mischance and, above all, the frailties innate in us--these buffet
us for a while, and we are puzzled, and we demand of God, as Job did,
why is this permitted?  And then as the hair dwindles, the wit grows."

"Oh, yes, with age we take a slackening hold upon events; we let all
happenings go by more lightly; and we even concede the universe not to
be under any actual bond to be intelligible.  Yes, that is true.  But
is it gain, my poet? for I had thought it to be loss."

"With age we gain the priceless certainty that sorrow and injustice are
ephemeral.  Solvitur ambulando, my dear.  I have attested this merely
by living long enough.  I, like any other man of my years, have in my
day known more or less every grief which the world breeds; and each
maddened me in turn, as each was duly salved by time; so that to-day
their ravages vex me no more than do the bee-stings I got when I was an
urchin.  To-day I grant the world to be composed of muck and sunshine
intermingled; but, upon the whole, I find the sunshine more pleasant to
look at, and--greedily, because my time for sightseeing is not very
long--I stare at it.  And I hold Judith's creed to be the best of all
imaginable creeds--that if we do nothing very wrong, all human
imbroglios, in some irrational and quite incomprehensible fashion, will
be straightened to our satisfaction.  Meanwhile, you also voice a tonic
truth--this universe of ours, and, reverently speaking, the Maker of
this universe as well, is under no actual bond to be intelligible in
dealing with us."  He laughed at this season and fell into a lighter
tone.  "Do I preach like a little conventicle-attending tradesman?
Faith, you must remember that when I talk gravely Judith listens as if
it were an oracle discoursing.  For Judith loves me as the wisest and
the best of men.  I protest her adoration frightens me.  What if she
were to find me out?"

"I loved what was divine in you," the woman answered.

"Oddly enough, that is the perfect truth!  And when what was divine in
me had burned a sufficiency of incense to your vanity, your vanity's
owner drove off in a fine coach and left me to die in a garret.  Then
Judith came.  Then Judith nursed and tended and caressed me--and Judith
only in all the world!--as once you did that boy you spoke of.  Ah,
madam, and does not sorrow sometimes lie awake o' nights in the low
cradle of that child? and sometimes walk with you by day and clasp your
hand--much as his tiny hand did once, so trustingly, so like the
clutching of a vine--and beg you never to be friends with anything save
sorrow?  And do you wholeheartedly love those other women's boys--who
did not die?  Yes, I remember.  Judith, too, remembered.  I was her
father, for all that I had forsaken my family to dance Jack-pudding
attendance on a fine Court lady.  So Judith came.  And Judith, who sees
in play-writing just a very uncertain way of making money--Judith, who
cannot tell a B from a bull's foot,--why, Judith, madam, did not ask,
but gave, what was divine."

"You are unfair," she cried.  "Oh, you are cruel, you juggle words,
make knives of them. . . .  You" and she spoke as with difficulty--"you
have no right to know just how I loved my boy!  You should be either
man or woman!"

He said pensively:  "Yes, I am cruel.  But you had mirth and beauty
once, and I had only love and a vocabulary.  Who then more flagrantly
abused the gifts God gave?  And why should I not be cruel to you, who
made a master-poet of me for your recreation?  Lord, what a deal of
ruined life it takes to make a little art!  Yes, yes, I know.  Under
old oaks lovers will mouth my verses, and the acorns are not yet shaped
from which those oaks will spring.  My adoration and your perfidy, all
that I have suffered, all that I have failed in even, has gone toward
the building of an enduring monument.  All these will be immortal,
because youth is immortal, and youth delights in demanding explanations
of infinity.  And only to this end I have suffered and have catalogued
the ravings of a perverse disease which has robbed my life of all the
normal privileges of life as flame shrivels hair from the arm--that
young fools such as I was once might be pleased to murder my rhetoric,
and scribblers parody me in their fictions, and schoolboys guess at the
date of my death!"  This he said with more than ordinary animation; and
then he shook his head.  "There is a leaven," he said--"there is a
leaven even in your smuggest and most inconsiderable tradesman."

She answered, with a wistful smile:  "I, too, regret my poet.  And just
now you are more like him----"

"Faith, but he was really a poet--or, at least, at times----?"

"Not marble, nor the gilded monuments of princes shall outlive this
powerful rhyme----'"

"Dear, dear!" he said, in petulant vexation; "how horribly emotion
botches verse.  That clash of sibilants is both harsh and
ungrammatical.  _Shall_ should be changed to _will_."  And at that the
woman sighed, because, in common with all persons who never essayed
creative verbal composition, she was quite certain perdurable writing
must spring from a surcharged heart, rather than from a rearrangement
of phrases.  And so,

"Very unfeignedly I regret my poet," she said, "my poet, who was
unhappy and unreasonable, because I was not always wise or kind, or
even just.  And I did not know until to-day how much I loved my
poet. . . .  Yes, I know now I loved him.  I must go now.  I would I
had not come."

Then, standing face to face, he cried, "Eh, madam, and what if I also
have lied to you--in part?  Our work is done; what more is there to
say?"

"Nothing," she answered--"nothing.  Not even for you, who are a
master-smith of words to-day and nothing more."

"I?" he replied.  "Do you so little emulate a higher example that even
for a moment you consider me?"

She did not answer.


When she had gone, the playmaker sat for a long while in meditation;
and then smilingly he took up his pen.  He was bound for "an
uninhabited island" where all disasters ended in a happy climax.

"So, so!" he was declaiming, later on: "_We, too, are kin To dreams and
visions; and our little life Is gilded by such faint and cloud-wrapped
suns_--Only, that needs a homelier touch.  Rather, let us say, _We are
such stuff As dreams are made on_--Oh, good, good!--Now to pad out the
line. . . .  In any event, the Bermudas are a seasonable topic.  Now
here, instead of _thickly-templed India_, suppose we write _the
still-vexed Bermoothes_--Good, good!  It fits in well enough. . . ."

And so in clerkly fashion he sat about the accomplishment of his stint
of labor in time for dinner.  A competent workman is not disastrously
upset by interruption; and, indeed, he found the notion of surprising
Judith with an unlooked-for trinket or so to be at first a very
efficacious spur to composition.

And presently the strong joy of creating kindled in him, and phrase
flowed abreast with thought, and the playmaker wrote fluently and
surely to an accompaniment of contented ejaculations.  He regretted
nothing, he would not now have laid aside his pen to take up a scepter.
For surely--he would have said--to live untroubled, and weave beautiful
and winsome dreams is the most desirable of human fates.  But he did
not consciously think of this, because he was midcourse in the evoking
of a mimic tempest which, having purged its victims of unkindliness and
error, aimed (in the end) only to sink into an amiable calm.
